   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors are viable low-cost nitrate (NO(3)(-)) removal applications for treating agricultural and aquaculture discharges. The active microbial biofilms growing on woodchips are conducting nitrogen (N) removal, reducing NO(3)(-) while oxidizing the carbon (C) from woodchips. However, bioreactor age, and changes in the operating conditions or in the microbial community might affect the NO(3)(-) removal as well as potentially promote nitrous oxide (N(2)O) production through either incomplete denitrification or dissimilatory NO(3)(-) reduction to ammonium (DNRA). Here, we combined stable isotope approach, amplicon sequencing, and captured metagenomics for studying the potential NO(3)(-) removal rates, and the abundance and community composition of microbes involved in N transformation processes in the three different full-scale woodchip bioreactors treating recirculating aquaculture system (RAS) effluents. We confirmed denitrification producing di‑nitrogen gas (N(2)) to be the primary NO(3)(-) removal pathway, but found that 6% of NO(3)(-) could be released as N(2)O under high NO(3)(-) concentrations and low amounts of bioavailable C, whereas DNRA rates tend to increase with the C amount. The abundance of denitrifiers was equally high between the studied bioreactors, yet the potential NO(3)(-) removal rates were linked to the denitrifying community diversity. The same core proteobacterial groups were driving the denitrification, while Bacteroidetes dominated the DNRA carrying microbes in all the three bioreactors studied. Altogether, our results suggest that woodchip bioreactors have a high genetic potential for NO(3)(-) removal through a highly abundant and diverse denitrifying community, but that the rates and dynamics between the NO(3)(-) removal pathways depend on the other factors (e.g., bioreactor design, operating conditions, and the amount of bioavailable C in relation to the incoming NO(3)(-) concentrations).},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors are being successfully applied to remove nitrate from commercial land-based recirculating aquaculture system (RAS) effluents. In order to understand and optimize the overall function of these bioreactors, knowledge on the microbial communities, especially on the microbes with potential for production or mitigation of harmful substances (e.g. hydrogen sulfide; H(2)S) is needed. In this study, we quantified and characterized bacterial and fungal communities, including potential H(2)S producers and consumers, using qPCR and high throughput sequencing of 16S rRNA gene. We took water samples from bioreactors and their inlet and outlet, and sampled biofilms growing on woodchips and on the outlet of the three full-scale woodchip bioreactors treating effluents of three individual RAS. We found that bioreactors hosted a high biomass of both bacteria and fungi. Although the composition of microbial communities of the inlet varied between the bioreactors, the conditions in the bioreactors selected for the same core microbial taxa. The H(2)S producing sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB) were mainly found in the nitrate-limited outlets of the bioreactors, the main groups being deltaproteobacterial Desulfobulbus and Desulfovibrio. The abundance of H(2)S consuming sulfate oxidizing bacteria (SOB) was 5-10 times higher than that of SRB, and SOB communities were dominated by Arcobacter and other genera from phylum Epsilonbacteraeota, which are also capable of autotrophic denitrification. Indeed, the relative abundance of potential autotrophic denitrifiers of all denitrifier sequences was even 54% in outlet water samples and 56% in the outlet biofilm samples. Altogether, our results show that the highly abundant bacterial and fungal communities in woodchip bioreactors are shaped through the conditions prevailing within the bioreactor, indicating that the bioreactors with similar design and operational settings should provide similar function even when conditions in the preceding RAS would differ. Furthermore, autotrophic denitrifiers can have a significant role in woodchip biofilters, consuming potentially produced H(2)S and removing nitrate, lengthening the operational age and thus further improving the overall environmental benefit of these bioreactors.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors are increasingly being applied to remove nitrate from agricultural subsurface drainage. However, dissolved organic carbon (DOC) released from woodchips may negatively affect the aquatic ecosystems and drinking water supplies. The objective of this study was to evaluate the leaching characteristics, disinfection byproduct (DBP) formation potentials, and treatability of DOC derived from a laboratory woodchip bioreactor. Initial flush of woodchips resulted in the release of high organic content from woodchips. The DOC concentration in the bioreactor effluent decreased rapidly from 71.8 to 20.7 mg/L during the first week of operation, and then gradually decreased to 3.0 mg/L after 240 days of operation under a hydraulic retention time of 24 h. A recycled steel chip filter removed an average of 44.2% of the DOC in the bioreactor effluent. Hydrophobic carbons and organic compounds with molecular weight of 10-100 KDa were the most abundant organic fractions in the DOC released from woodchips. These two DOC fractions were also the most important precursors to the formation of total organic halogen (TOX) during chlorination and chloramination. The TOX yields of woodchip DOC were similar to those of Suwannee River Fulvic Acid, suggesting that organic compounds released from woodchips have great potentials for DBP formation. Alum and polyaluminium chloride were more effective at removing woodchip DOC than ferric chloride during coagulation. Drinking water treatment plants may need to adjust coagulant types and doses in order to remove woodchip DOC in the source water to reduce the DBP formation potential.},
   abstract = {AIMS: The aim of this study was to obtain cold-adapted denitrifying fungi that could be used for bioaugmentation in woodchip bioreactors to remove nitrate from agricultural subsurface drainage water. METHODS AND RESULTS: We isolated a total of 91 nitrate-reducing fungal strains belonging to Ascomycota and Mucoromycota from agricultural soil and a woodchip bioreactor under relatively cold conditions (5 and 15 degrees C). When these strains were incubated with (15) N-labelled nitrate, (29) N(2) was frequently produced, suggesting the occurrence of co-denitrification (microbially mediated nitrosation). Two strains also produced (30) N(2) , indicating their ability to reduce N(2) O. Of the 91 nitrate-reducing fungal strains, fungal nitrite reductase gene (nirK) and cytochrome P450 nitric oxide reductase gene (p450nor) were detected by PCR in 34 (37%) and 11 (12%) strains, respectively. Eight strains possessed both nirK and p450nor, further verifying their denitrification capability. In addition, most strains degraded cellulose under denitrification condition. CONCLUSIONS: Diverse nitrate-reducing fungi were isolated from soil and a woodchip bioreactor. These fungi reduced nitrate to gaseous N forms at relatively low temperatures. These cold-adapted, cellulose-degrading and nitrate-reducing fungi could support themselves and other denitrifiers in woodchip bioreactors. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The cold-adapted, cellulose-degrading and nitrate-reducing fungi isolated in this study could be useful to enhance nitrate removal in woodchip bioreactors under low-temperature conditions.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors are a promising approach to remove nitrate from agricultural drainage systems; however, their low removal efficiency at cold temperatures remains a significant challenge. Here we analyzed the efficacy of fungal inoculation to enhance nitrate removal in woodchip bioreactor microcosms under cold conditions. Among the cold-adapted, nitrate-reducing, and cellulose-degrading fungi previously isolated from soil, we identified Linnemannia hyaline strain SCG-10 as the fastest nitrate reducer. Inoculation of this fungal strain enhanced the rates of nitrate reduction, N-2 production, and dissolved organic carbon production in woodchip bioreactor microcosms at 5 degree celsius. Production of N2O was minor (<1%) in this study most likely due to the enhanced activity of N2O reducers by labile carbon. Quantitative PCR for nitrogen cycle-related genes showed the active transcription of both fungal and bacterial denitrification genes. These results suggest that inoculating cold-adapted, nitrate-reducing, and cellulose-degrading fungi is a promising approach to remove nitrate from agricultural fields under cold conditions.},
   abstract = {AIMS: This study was done to obtain denitrifiers that could be used for bioaugmentation in woodchip bioreactors to remove nitrate from agricultural subsurface drainage water. METHODS AND RESULTS: We isolated denitrifiers from four different bioreactors in Minnesota, and characterized the strains by measuring their denitrification rates and analysing their whole genomes. A total of 206 bacteria were isolated from woodchips and thick biofilms (bioslimes) that formed in the bioreactors, 76 of which were able to reduce nitrate at 15 degrees C. Among those, nine potential denitrifying strains were identified, all of which were isolated from the woodchip samples. Although many nitrate-reducing strains were isolated from the bioslime samples, none were categorized as denitrifiers but instead as carrying out dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium. CONCLUSIONS: Among the denitrifiers confirmed by (15) N stable isotope analysis and genome analysis, Cellulomonas cellasea strain WB94 and Microvirgula aerodenitrificans strain BE2.4 appear to be promising for bioreactor bioaugmentation due to their potential for both aerobic and anaerobic denitrification, and the ability of strain WB94 to degrade cellulose. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Denitrifiers isolated in this study could be useful for bioaugmentation application to enhance nitrate removal in woodchip bioreactors.},
   abstract = {Stormwater is increasingly being valued as a freshwater resource in arid regions and can provide opportunities for beneficial reuse via aquifer recharge if adequate pollutant removal can be achieved. We envision a multi-unit operation approach to capture, treat, and recharge (CTR) stormwater using low energy, cost-effective technologies appropriate for larger magnitude, less frequent events. Herein, we tested nutrient, metal, and trace organic contaminant removal of a pilot-scale CTR system in the laboratory using biochar-amended woodchip bioreactors following eight months of aging under field conditions with exposure to real stormwater. Replicate columns with woodchips and biochar (33% by weight), woodchips and straw, or woodchips only were operated with continuous, saturated flow for eight months using water from a watershed that drained an urban area consisting of residential housing and parks in Sonoma, California. After aging, columns were challenged for five months by continuous exposure to synthetic stormwater amended with 50 mug L(-1) of six trace organic contaminants (i.e., fipronil, diuron, 1H-benzotriazole, atrazine, 2,4-D, and TCEP) and five metals (Cd, Cu, Ni, Pb, Zn) frequently detected in stormwater in order to replicate the treatment unit operation of a CTR system. Throughout the eight-month aging and five-month challenge experiment, nitrate concentrations were below the detection limit after treatment (i.e., <0.05 mg N L(-1)). The removal efficiencies for metals in all treatments were >80% for Ni, Cu, Cd, and Pb. For Zn, about 50% removal occurred in the woodchip-biochar systems while the other systems achieved about 20% removal. No breakthrough of the trace organic compounds was observed in any biochar-containing columns. Woodchip columns without biochar removed approximately 99% of influent atrazine and 90% of influent fipronil, but exhibited relatively rapid breakthrough of TCEP, 2,4-D, 1H-benzotriazole, and diuron. The addition of straw to the woodchip columns provided no significant benefit compared to woodchips alone. Due to the lack of breakthrough of trace organics in the biochar-woodchip columns, we estimated column breakthrough with a diffusion-limited sorption model. Results of the model indicate breakthrough for the trace organics would occur between 10,000 and 32,000 pore volumes. Under ideal conditions this could be equivalent to decades of service, assuming failure by other processes (e.g., clogging, biofouling) does not occur. These results indicate that multiple contaminants can be removed in woodchip-biochar reactors employed in stormwater treatment systems with suitable flow control and that the removal of trace organic contaminants is enhanced significantly by addition of biochar.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors are increasingly used as tools to mitigate nitrogen (N) pollution from agricultural drainage water. They consist of a basin filled with woodchip material through which N contaminated drainage water can flow. During the water transport through the filter matrix, oxygen is rapidly depleted and denitrification removes a fraction of the nitrate N present in the water. However, the N removal efficiency of the bioreactors varies significantly both across systems and seasonally. Furthermore, denitrification can also produce nitrous oxide, which is a potent greenhouse gas. Here, we investigated how variation in hydraulic residence time influenced N removal efficiency and nitrous oxide emissions at eight woodchip bioreactors of different flow designs, monitored for 2-4 years. We also characterised the relative abundance of genes involved in the N cycle at three of the bioreactors using metagenomics. Our results showed that total N removal was 17-73% of the yearly incoming N and that it was influenced by hydraulic residence time and water temperature. Nitrous oxide emissions were variable among the different bioreactors and were higher when the hydraulic residence time was less than 60 h. However, the yearly nitrous oxide release did not exceed 2.4% of the nitrate removal (on N atom basis) and the mean among the bioreactors was 0.6%. Although there were marked differences in nitrate removal and nitrous oxide emissions, there were no clear differences in the relative abundance of N-cycling genes among and within three tested bioreactors. Yet, denitrification genes greatly outnumbered genes related to dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium. Overall, our study showed that all eight bioreactors were effective in removing N from agricultural drainage water and that nitrous oxide emissions were low, especially at hydraulic residence times of 60 h or more.},
   abstract = {The wood industry consumes a lot of water. Due to the reduction of water resources in the world, the treatment of this contaminated water is very essential. In this study, the removal efficiencies of the chemical oxygen demand (COD) and turbidity from woodchips wastewater with the use of a sequencing batch reactor (SBR) were studied at a bench scale. Woodchips wastewater samples were collected with a COD of 1300 mg L-1 and a turbidity of 93 NTU. The optimization of the SBR process was investigated by response surface methodology (RSM) based on a central composite design (CCD). A quadratic polynomial model was fit to the data with R-2 of 0.9919 for COD reduction, R-2 of 0.9910 for turbidity removal, and R-2 of 0.9945 for sludge volume Index (SVI), respectively. The effect of three parameters, including initial COD, mixed liquor suspended solids (MLSS), and Hydraulic retention time (HRT) on the COD reduction and turbidity removal were evaluated. The initial COD (A), MLSS (B), cycle time (C), AB, AC, BC, A(2), B-2, and C-2 were considered as the affective parameters in the COD reduction. Initial COD (A), MLSS (B), A(2), B-2, C-2, AC, and BC were observed as the remarkable model terms on the turbidity removal. Also, initial COD (A), MLSS (B), cycle time (C), B-2, C-2, and BC were the significant model factors in SVI index. At optimal conditions, involving an initial COD of 1000 mg L-1, an organic loading rate (OLR) of 0.450 kg COD/m(3)d, MLSS of 3000 mg L-1, and cycle time of 24 h, we observed 94.6% of COD reduction, 98.5% turbidity removal, and 79 mL g(-1) SVI. The results also showed that the kinetic of COD reduction and turbidity removal could be represented by the pseudo-second-order model. (C) 2019 Institution of Chemical Engineers. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.},
   abstract = {Denitrifying bioreactors (DNBRs) harness the natural capacity of microorganisms to convert bioavailable nitrogen (N) into inert nitrogen gas (N) by providing a suitable anaerobic habitat and an organic carbon energy source. Woodchip systems are reported to remove 2 to 22 g N m d, but the potential to enhance denitrification with alternative substrates holds promise. The objective of this study was to determine the effect of adding biochar, an organic carbon pyrolysis product, to an in-field, pilot-scale woodchip DNBR. Two 25-m DNBRs, one with woodchips and the other with woodchips and a 10% by volume addition of biochar, were installed on the Delmarva Peninsula, Virginia. Performance was assessed using flood-and-drain batch experiments. An initial release of N was observed during the establishment of both DNBRs, reflecting a start-up phenomenon observed in previous studies. Nitrate (NO-N) removal rates observed during nine batch experiments 4 to 22 mo after installation were 0.25 to 6.06 g N m d. The presence of biochar, temperature, and influent NO-N concentration were found to have significant effects on NO-N removal rates using a linear mixed effects model. The model predicts that biochar increases the rate of N removal when influent concentrations are above approximately 5 to 10 mg L NO-N but that woodchip DNBRs outperform biochar-amended DNBRs when influent concentrations are lower, possibly reflecting the release of N temporarily stored in the biochar matrix. These results indicate that in high N-yielding systems the addition of biochar to standard woodchip DNBRs has the potential to significantly increase N removal.},
   abstract = {Increased adoption of denitrifying bioreactors to mitigate nutrient export in agricultural drainage can improve water quality but also raises concerns about potential unintended consequences of widespread implementation. Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, especially as nitrous oxide (N2O) produced during denitrification, are of particular concern. To gain understanding of the variables controlling bioreactor GHG production, the effects of nutrient loading, hydraulic residence time, and biochar addition on emissions of N2O methane (CH4), and carbon dioxide (CO2) were tested in 6550 cm(3) laboratory columns. Biochar, an organic carbon pyrolysis product, was hypothesized to reduce GHG emissions, as has been reported with its use as an agricultural soil amendment. GHG fluxes were measured during 5-day trials using the closed dynamic chamber technique. The 36 combinations of three media types (woodchips, 10% biochar, and 30% biochar), three residence times (3, 6, and 12 h), and four influent formulations, all combinations of high and low nitrogen as nitrate (16.1 and 4.5 mg NO3-N L-1) and phosphorus as orthophosphate (1.9 and 0.6 mg PO (4)-P L-1) concentrations, were tested in triplicate. Treatment effects were assessed with linear mixed effects models. Biochar addition, particularly at the 30% rate, was found to increase N2O and CO2 emissions and the proportion of removed NO3-N released as N2O-N. However, quantified GHG flux rates were not environmentally concerning. Methane fluxes were negligible, and CO2 fluxes were not considered to increase net GHG emissions. Nitrous oxide fluxes normalized to surface area averaged 2.92 mg N2O-N m(-2) d(-1), and 98% of measured fluxes were within the range previously reported for woodchip bioreactors and considered acceptable.},
   abstract = {Nitrate (NO(3)(-)) removal in denitrifying bioreactors is influenced by flow, water chemistry, and design, but it is not known how these widely varying factors impact the production of nitrous oxide (N(2)O) or methane (CH(4)) across sites. Woodchip bioreactors link the hydrosphere and atmosphere in this respect, so five full-size bioreactors in Illinois, USA, were monitored for NO(3)(-), N(2)O, and CH(4) to better document where this water treatment technology resides along the pollution swapping to climate smart spectrum. Both surface fluxes and dissolved forms of N(2)O and CH(4) were measured (n = 7-11 sampling campaigns per site) at bioreactors ranging from <1 to nearly 5 years old and treating subsurface drainage areas from between 6.9 and 29 ha. Across all sites, N(2)O surface and dissolved volumetric production rates averaged 1.0 +/- 1.6 mg N(2)O-N/m(3)-d and 24 +/- 62 mg dN(2)O-N/m(3)-d, respectively, and CH(4) production rates averaged 6.0 +/- 26 mg CH(4)-C/m(3)-d and 310 +/- 520 mg dCH(4)-C/m(3)-d for surface and dissolved, respectively. However, N(2)O was consistently consumed at one bioreactor, and only three of the five sites produced notable CH(4). Surface fluxes of CH(4) were significantly reduced by the presence of a soil cover. Bioreactor denitrification was relatively efficient, with only 0.51 +/- 3.5 % of removed nitrate emitted as N(2)O (n = 48). Modeled indirect N(2)O emissions factors were significantly lower when a bioreactor was present versus absent (EF(5): 0.0055 versus 0.0062 kg N(2)O-N/kg NO(3)-N; p = 0.0011). While further greenhouse gas research on bioreactors is recommended, this should not be used as an excuse to slow adoption efforts. Bioreactors provide a practical option for voluntary water quality improvement in the heavily tile-drained US Midwest and elsewhere.},
   abstract = {Denitrification beds are a cost-effective technology for removing nitrate frail point source discharge. To date, field trials and operational beds have primarily used wood media as the carbon source; however, the use of alternative more labile carbon media could provide for increased removal rate, lower installation costs and reduced bed size. While previous laboratory experiments have investigated the potential of alternative carbon sources, these studies were typically of short duration and small scale and did not necessarily provide reliable information for denitrification bed design purposes. To address this issue, we compared nitrate removal, hydraulic and nutrient leaching characteristics of nine different carbon substrates in 0.2 m(3) barrels, at 14 and 23.5 degrees C over a 23-month period. Mean nitrate removal rates for the period 10-23 months were 19.8 and 15 g N m(-3) d(-1) (maize cobs), 7.8 and 10.5 g N m(-3) d(-1) (green waste), 5.8 and 7.8 g N m(-3) d(-1) (wheat straw), 3.0 and 4.9 g N m(-3) d(-1) (softwood), and 3.3 and 4.4 g N m(-3) d(-1) (hardwood) for the 14 and 23.5 degrees C treatments, respectively. Maize cobs provided a 3-6.5-fold increase in nitrate removal over wood media, without prohibitive decrease in hydraulic conductivity, but had higher rates of nutrient leaching at start-up. Significant difference in removal rate occurred between the 14 and 23.5 degrees C treatments, with the mean Q(10) temperature coefficient = 1.6 for all media types in the period 10-23 months. (C) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.},
   abstract = {Denitrifying woodchip bioreactors offer an opportunity to intercept and reduce nitrogen loads between agricultural fields and downstream aquatic ecosystems. Here we assessed the performance of three in-drain bioreactor beds installed in open drains receiving runoff and shallow ground water from rain-fed sugarcane production in the Wet Tropics of Australia. Drain nitrate-N concentrations were generally low, with a mean of 0.2 mg L-1 and maximum of 3.3 mg L-1, which may have been partially due to denitrification in the contributing soils. Bioreactors reduced the concentration of nitrate-N in intercepted waters (average 41% reduction). However, removal rates were often limited by nitrate-N availability. Load reduction over the 2018/19 season was just 0.11 kg N ha-1 yr- 1. This limited performance was in large part due to the dynamic nature of nitrogen loads in this system. Specifically, a high proportion of the annual nitrogen load occurring during 'first-flush' events immediately after fertilization (i.e. 72% during a 10-day period in 2018/19) resulting in considerable bypass flow (i.e. low interception). Our study is the first in the Australian Wet Tropics to assess the annualized performance and total load reductions of in-drain denitrifying bioreactor beds. Although showing their potential, our results highlight the fact that denitrifying bioreactor performance is determined by the hydraulic context of the catchment, and the proportion of the annual nitrate load that can be successfully intercepted.},
   abstract = {Woodchip filters have received attention in recent years for their ability to sustain denitrification activity across multiyear time frames. However, in some freshwater aquatic ecosystems, P rather than N is the nutrient considered most responsible for eutrophication. Previous studies have indicated that woodchip filters have limited ability to remove dissolved P, but in agricultural terrain, P export in watercourses is often dominated by particulate P (PP). Woodchip media, because of their high porosity and permeability and the surface roughness of the particles, could be effective for PP removal. In this study, we tested a woodchip filter for its ability to remove suspended sediment and associated PP at a farm in southern Ontario, Canada, where vegetable wash water with extremely high total suspended solids (TSS) was generated. The treatment system consisted of a 12.3-m concrete sedimentation tank and a slightly larger woodchip filter (16.1 m) installed in a subsurface trench. During 7 mo of full-scale operation, treating 10.8 m d, the filter system removed 71% of influent total P (TP) averaging 8.8 mg L and 99% of TSS averaging 5800 mg L, with most of the removal occurring in the tank and a lesser amount (6-16%) occurring in the woodchip filter. Almost all of the TP removal was associated with PP (91% removal) because dissolved P, averaging 1.5 mg L in the wash water, was little changed. Woodchip filters, when coupled with a solids settling tank, have the potential to provide high-capacity, low-maintenance treatment of suspended solids and associated particulate P in turbid waters.},
   abstract = {Denitrification bioreactors are one of the newest options for nitrate removal in agricultural drainage waters Optimization of denitrification bioreactor design requires the ability to identify concrete values for the hydraulic properties of bioreactor fill media Hydraulic properties, chiefly saturated hydraulic conductivity but also porosity and particle size, are not known for many types of possible bioreactor media though they have a significant impact upon bioreactor design and performance This work was undertaken to more fully quantify the hydraulic properties of the major type of fill media used in Iowa denitrification bioreactors through a series of porosity, hydraulic conductivity, and particle size analysis tests In addition, a particle size analysis was performed for two types of woodchips and one type of wood shreds in order to quantify and highlight the differences between what is commonly referred to as "wood fill " Saturated hydraulic conductivity was determined for blends of woodchips, corn cobs, and pea gravel For one of the most common types of woodchips used in bioreactors, the porosity varied from 66% to 78% depending on packing density and the average saturated hydraulic conductivity was 9 5 coils It was found that additions of pea gravel significantly increased the hydraulic conductivity of woodchips though additions of corn cobs did not Regardless of the fill mixture used, It is vital to design the bioreactor using the hydraulic properties for that specific media},
   abstract = {There is a lack of information on denitrifying bioreactors treating subsurface drainage water at the end of their initial design life due to the relative newness of the technology and the relatively long estimated life. A denitrifying bioreactor (15 m L x 7.6 m W x 1.1 m D) installed in August 2008 in Greene County, Iowa, was recharged with new woodchips in November 2017 (age 9.25 years), providing the opportunity to evaluate the properties of the wood media at the end of design life. The objective was to pair a battery of physical, chemical, and nitrate-N removal tests on the wood media harvested from the bioreactor with field observations to assess likely reasons why denitrifying bioreactors treating tile drainage may need to be recharged. The two types of wood media harvested from the bioreactor (termed woodchips and mixed shreds) had median particle sizes (D-50) of 12.1 and 7.7 mm, respectively, and saturated hydraulic conductivities of 4.2.3.0 and 3.1. 1.0 cm s(-1) (mean. standard deviation), which were within the range of reported values for woodchips, albeit at the low end. The wood media carbon content and quality had degraded (e.g., lignocellulose indices of 0.63 to 0.74, nearing the range of decomposition stabilization), although batch tests suggested the robustness of wood as a carbon source to support nitrate removal (e.g., 65% nitrate concentration reduction in drainage water). Woodchip degradation along with sedimentation from the drainage system likely reduced conductivities over time. Development of preferential flow paths through the bioreactor was indicated by low bioreactor outflow rates (i.e., reduced permeability) and reduced hydraulic efficiency based on conservative tracer testing. These changes in media properties and linked impacts resulted in the need to recharge this bioreactor after nine years.},
   abstract = {Denitrifying bioreactors enhance the natural process of denitrification in a practical way to treat nitrate-nitrogen (N) in a variety of N-laden water matrices. The design and construction of bioreactors for treatment of subsurface drainage in the U.S. is guided by USDA-NRCS Conservation Practice Standard 605. This review consolidates the state of the science for denitrifying bioreactors using case studies from across the globe with an emphasis on full-size bioreactor nitrate-N removal and cost-effectiveness. The focus is on bed-style bioreactors (including in-ditch modifications), although there is mention of denitrifying walls, which broaden the applicability of bioreactor technology in some areas. Subsurface drainage denitrifying bioreactors have been assessed as removing 20% to 40% of annual nitrate-N loss in the Midwest, and an evaluation across the peer-reviewed literature published over the past three years showed that bioreactors around the world have been generally consistent with that (N load reduction median: 46%; mean +/- SD: 40% +/- 26%; n = 15). Reported N removal rates were on the order of 5.1 g N m(-3) d(-1) (median; mean +/- SD: 7.2 +/- 9.6 g N m(-3) d(-1); n = 27). Subsurface drainage bioreactor installation costs have ranged from less than $5,000 to $27,000, with estimated cost efficiencies ranging from less than $2.50 kg(-1) N year(-1) to roughly $20 kg(-1) N year(-1) (although they can be as high as $48 kg(-1) N year(-1)). A suggested monitoring setup is described primarily for the context of conservation practitioners and watershed groups for assessing annual nitrate-N load removal performance of subsurface drainage denitrifying bioreactors. Recommended minimum reporting measures for assessing and comparing annual N removal performance include: bioreactor dimensions and installation date; fill media size, porosity, and type; nitrate-N concentrations and water temperatures; bioreactor flow treatment details; basic drainage system and bioreactor design characteristics; and N removal rate and efficiency.},
   abstract = {Denitrifying bioreactors with solid organic carbon sources (i.e., "woodchip bioreactors") have proven to be relatively simple and cost effective treatment systems for nitrate-laden agricultural and aquacultural waters and wastewaters. However, because this technology is still relatively new, design modifications, such as the addition of a post-bioreactor polishing chamber filled with inert media, may offer potential to increase nitrate removal and mitigate unintended bioreactor by-products. Paired-column configurations filled with woodchips followed by plastic biofilm carrier media showed significant nitrate removal within the woodchip bioreactor columns (37, 26, and 88% nitrate removal efficiencies at woodchip column retention times of 7.1, 18, and 52 h), but no significant additional nitrate removal benefit of the post-processing plastic media chamber (41, 22, and 89% nitrate removal efficiencies, respectively). Releases of chemical oxygen demand from the woodchips were likely not sufficient to fuel significant nitrate removal in the polishing chamber. However, the polishing chamber significantly reduced nitrite releases from the bioreactor columns, and provided some mitigation of reduced sulfate during the 52-h retention time testing period (influent, woodchip effluent, and plastic chamber effluent sulfate concentrations of 23.6, 18.8, and 20.7 mg SO42- L-1 , respectively). A full-scale post-woodchip polishing chamber filled with inert plastic media generally may not be worth the added cost unless the receiving waters are particularly sensitive to nitrite or hydrogen sulfide.},
   abstract = {Chemoheterotrophic denitrification technologies using woodchips as a solid carbon source (i.e., woodchip bioreactors) have been widely trialed for treatment of diffuse-source agricultural nitrogen pollution. There is growing interest in the use of this simple, relatively low-cost biological wastewater treatment option in waters with relatively higher total suspended solids (TSS) and chemical oxygen demand (COD) such as aquaculture wastewater. This work: (1) evaluated hydraulic retention time (HRT) impacts on COD/TSS removal, and (2) assessed the potential for woodchip clogging under this wastewater chemistry. Four pilot-scale woodchip denitrification bioreactors operated for 267 d showed excellent TSS removal (>90%) which occurred primarily near the inlet, and that COD removal was maximized at lower HRTs (e.g., 56% removal efficiency and 25 g of COD removed per m(3) of bioreactor per d at a 24 h HRT). However, influent wastewater took progressively longer to move into the woodchips likely due to a combination of (1) woodchip settling, (2) clogging due to removed wastewater solids and/or accumulated bacterial growth, and (3) the pulsed flow system pushing the chips away from the inlet. The bioreactor that received the highest loading rate experienced the most altered hydraulics. Statistically significant increases in woodchip P content over time in woodchip bags placed near the bioreactor outlets (0.03 vs 0.10%P(2)O(5)) and along the bioreactor floor (0.04 vs. 0.12%P(2)O(5)) confirmed wastewater solids were being removed and may pose a concern for subsequent nutrient mineralization and release. Nevertheless, the excellent nitrate-nitrogen and TSS removal along with notable COD removal indicated woodchip bioreactors are a viable water treatment technology for these types of wastewaters given they are used downstream of a filtration device.},
   abstract = {Pairing denitrifying woodchip bioreactors and phosphorus-sorbing filters provides a unique, engineered approach for dual nutrient removal from waters impaired with both nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P). This column study aimed to test placement of two P-filter media (acid mine drainage treatment residuals and steel slag) relative to a denitrifying system to maximize N and P removal and minimize pollution swapping under varying flow conditions (i.e., woodchip column hydraulic retention times (HRTs) of 7.2, 18, and 51 h; P-filter HRTs of 7.6-59 min). Woodchip denitrification columns were placed either upstream or downstream of P-filters filled with either medium. The configuration with woodchip denitrifying systems placed upstream of the P-filters generally provided optimized dissolved P removal efficiencies and removal rates. The P-filters placed upstream of the woodchip columns exhibited better P removal than downstream-placed P-filters only under overly long (i.e., N-limited) retention times when highly reduced effluent exited the woodchip bioreactors. The paired configurations using mine drainage residuals provided significantly greater P removal than the steel slag P-filters (e.g., 25-133 versus 8.8-48 g P removed m(-3) filter media d(-1), respectively), but there were no significant differences in N removal between treatments (removal rates: 8.0-18 g N removed m(-3) woodchips d(-1); N removal efficiencies: 18-95% across all HRTs). The range of HRTs tested here resulted in various undesirable pollution swapping by-products from the denitrifying bioreactors: nitrite production when nitrate removal was not complete and sulfate reduction, chemical oxygen demand production and decreased pH during overly long retention times. The downstream P-filter placement provided a polishing step for removal of chemical oxygen demand and nitrite.},
   abstract = {Woodchip cost and sourcing availability may be barriers for denitrifying bioreactor implementation. This survey comparison of nutrient composition improves understanding of the spectrum of widely available wood media. Sixteen new woodchip types purchased from bulk suppliers and six chipped debris media sourced for free at the supplier were analyzed for carbon (C), nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), cellulose, and lignin. Results were presented in context of woodchips harvested from saturated and unsaturated portions of operational bioreactors. The municipal debris was not significantly different from the bulk woodchips in C or cellulose concentrations (e.g., medians 46.7 vs 47.7 %C, respectively) but had significantly greater N and P concentrations (e.g., 0.45 vs 0.27 % N, respectively). The lower C:N, C:P, and lignin:N ratios of the chipped debris versus bulk supplier (e.g., C:N of 103 vs 177, respectively) highlighted that the role of macronutrients in supporting a diverse "bioreactor ecosystem " (e.g., decomposers who make C available) is not fully understood. Useful ranges of nutrient and fiber composition were provided for future modeling efforts.},
   abstract = {Denitrifying bioreactors are edge-of-field structures that remove excess nitrogen (N) from intercepted agricultural drainage by supporting the activity of denitrifying microorganisms with a saturated organic carbon substrate. Although these bioreactors successfully mitigate N export, the typical woodchip systems have little effect on phosphorus (P), which is also often present in environmentally harmful quantities in drainage waters. Currently, the evidence that amending woodchip bioreactors with biochar enhances both N and P removal rates is mixed, but more work is required to test this hypothesis under controlled conditions. To determine the effect of biochar amendment on nitrate (NO(3)-N) and phosphate (PO(4)-P) removal in woodchip bioreactors, three media types-aged woodchips (W), 10% (B(10)) and 30% (B(30)) biochar by volume-were tested under different operational conditions during five-day laboratory trials with horizontal, flow-through columns. Nutrient removal was observed under different flow rates yielding hydraulic residence times of 3, 6, and 12 hours with four formulations of simulated agricultural drainage, all combination of 16.1 or 4.5 mg L(-1) NO(3)-N and 1.9 or 0.6 mg L(-1) PO(4)-P. Each unique treatment with respect to media type, HRT, and influent formulation was tested in triplicate using independent columns. All treatments successfully removed NO(3)-N, but PO(4)-P removal was inconsistent. Cumulative NO(3)-N removal efficiencies ranged 15-98% with an average removal rate of 11.0 g m(-3) d(-1); biochar amendment enhanced removal only in response to sufficiently high loading rates. Cumulative PO(4)-P removal efficiencies ranged from 66% removal to 170% export of the influent load; biochar addition was associated with increased export. These results indicate that pine-feedstock biochar poses a substantial increase to PO(4)-P leaching risk and only modestly enhances NO(3)-N removal given sufficiently high loading.},
   abstract = {Removal of nitrates and nitrogen (NO3--N) from surface and groundwater was a matter of special importance, and there was a need for sustaining the public health problems and aquatic life related to the presence of NO3--N in drinking water supplies. The influence of hydraulic retention time (HRT), volumetric loading rates (VLRs) and temperature on denitrification were investigated in a biofilm configured woodchip bioreactor (WBR) from synthetic tile water. Three HRTs were examined, ranging from 4 to 12 h. The denitrification removal efficiency (RE) >99% was obtained in WBR operated at 8-h HRT. The WBR was operated with VLR ranging from 49 to 198 g NO3--N/L/day for denitrification study. The maximum load reduction of the WBR showed 99% in second level of reactor operation with biomass concentration of 12.3 g/L. The pH (6.5-7.2) and temperature (17-20 degrees C) under the unique study profoundly impact on denitrification. The coefficient factors of 0.8 and 1.05 have been reported in studies with a temperature change from 4 to 20 degrees C. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) analysis documented formation of biofilm on woodchips in each level of reactor operation study. Therefore we recommend from this study, that the horizontal flow based WBR to enhance denitrification while minimizing higher operating conditions in denitrification beds. (C) 2014 European Regional Centre for Ecohydrology of Polish Academy of Sciences. Published by Elsevier Urban & Partner Sp. z o.o. All rights reserved.},
   abstract = {Examinations identified with nitrate removal with the utilization of wheat straw or 100% wood Denitrification in biofilm configured horizontal flow woodchip bioreactor: Effect of hydraulic},
   abstract = {Tile drainage is the major source of nitrate in the upper Midwest, and end-of-tile removal techniques such as wood chip bioreactors have been installed that allow current farming practices to continue, with nitrate removed through denitrification. There have been few multiyear studies of bioreactors examining controls on nitrate removal rates. We evaluated the nitrate removal performance of two wood chip bioreactors during the first 3 yr of operation and examined the major factors that regulated nitrate removal. Bioreactor 2 was subject to river flooding, and performance was not assessed. Bioreactor 1 had average monthly nitrate removal rates of 23 to 44 g N m d in Year 1, which decreased to 1.2 to 11 g N m d in Years 2 and 3. The greater N removal rates in Year 1 and early in Year 2 were likely due to highly degradable C in the woodchips. Only late in Year 2 and in Year 3 was there a strong temperature response in the nitrate removal rate. Less than 1% of the nitrate removed was emitted as NO. Due to large tile inputs of nitrate (729-2127 kg N) at high concentrations ( approximately 30 mg nitrate N L) in Years 2 and 3, overall removal efficiency was low (3 and 7% in Years 2 and 3, respectively). Based on a process-based bioreactor performance model, Bioreactor 1 would have needed to be 9 times as large as the current system to remove 50% of the nitrate load from this 20-ha field.},
   abstract = {Pumping surface water from a ditch into a denitrifying woodchip bioreactor could improve nitrate-nitrogen (N) removal by minimizing flow variabilities such as early flow cessation at a given subsurface drainage outlet and flashy drainage hydrographs. Few field-scale subsurface drainage bioreactors with pumping configurations have been assessed. Such evaluations would help better bound reasonable expectations of the benefits and drawbacks at these more advanced bioreactors. An underloaded "ditch diversion" bioreactor constructed in 2018 in Illinois, USA (LW: 4.6 x 9.1 m), was retrofitted with a solar-powered pumping system in 2021 and was then monitored for a 29-d period in 2022 and a 93-d period in 2023. The pumped bioreactor achieved N removal rates averaging 7.5 and 5.2 g N/m(3)-d and N removal efficiencies of 50 and 61% for the monitoring periods in 2022 and 2023, respectively. Pumping generally improved the bioreactor's performance compared to the same monitoring windows from the historic (non-pumped) 2019-2021 periods. Regression analysis indicated the addition of a pump slightly improved N load removal compared to what might be expected for a conventional bioreactor. The somewhat unintended diurnal batch mode operation resulting from the solar-powered pumping system boosted water temperature in the overnight batches. Bioreactor performance can be improved with a pump, especially at underloaded sites, but the additional complexity and cost need to be carefully weighed.},
   abstract = {A relatively wide denitrifying woodchip bioreactor (LWD: 16.8 x 10.7 x 0.91 m) was installed with two flow-routing baffles in Illinois, USA with the design objectives of minimizing inflow manifold-related flow restrictions while maintaining both a relatively consistent footprint and nitrate-removal performance compared to conventional designs. This wide design did not improve the percentage of flow from the field that was treated (generally about 40% of flow treated) compared to other sites. However, the Richards-Baker flashiness index (0.74 to 0.91) and probability of exceedance evaluations indicated site drainage was flashy which might have accounted for the lower than expected performance. Nitrate removal was consistent with other bioreactors despite the new design ideas (22-24% edge of field N loss reduction; 0.72 to 1.3 g N removed m(-3) d(-1)). Within the context of the need for accelerated conservation drainage practice adoption across the US Midwest, trying to account for flow uncertainties like flashiness with site-specific designs could be a bottleneck for bioreactor design and implementation. It may be worthwhile to explore possible benefits of a simpler design approach (e.g. standardized plug-and-play designs) since there are many factors at play in bioreactor performance.},
   abstract = {The United States Environmental Protection Agency has established aggressive nutrient reduction goals to achieve water quality objectives for the Chesapeake Bay estuary. Nitrogen (N) reduction goals are proving particularly difficult to meet with an additional 20.4 million kg of annual nitrogen reductions needed by 2025, and many of the easily achievable and low-cost N reductions have been realized. We assess the feasibility of employing woodchip denitrifying bioreactors to treat legacy N derived from spring discharge in the Mid-Atlantic region. We estimate that in excess of 6100 kg of soluble N is discharged daily from United States Geological Survey identified springs in four Mid-Atlantic states within the Chesapeake Bay watershed. Based on typical bioreactor removal efficiency (30-55%) and potentially treatable flows (<6000 m(3)/d), widespread adoption of bioreactors to treat legacy N from 231 springs could conservatively result in 420-770 kg N removed per day, while strategic adoption targeting 48 springs with N concentrations of at least 3 mg/L and flows of at least 500 m(3)/d could result in 322-590 kg N removed per day more cost-effectively and with far fewer installations. A cost analysis indicates bioreactors can be a cost-effective N removal strategy, generally removing N for less than $5/kg.y. Relative to other nonpoint source pollution control practices, bioreactors also offer the ability to remove larger quantities of N per installation and are more easily monitored to quantify N reductions.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactor (WBR) is one of the green infrastructures in the agriculture system to reduce nitrate from agricultural drainage and stormwater. A lot of abiotic factors have been reported that affect nitrate removal lacking a comprehensive understanding. In this study, we studied eight important abiotic factors, including media age, hydraulic retention time (HRT), influent nitrate concentration (C(in)), temperature, dissolved organic carbon (DOC), dissolved oxygen (DO), pH, and effective porosity (rho(e)) of WBR-filling materials. Based on a database that included 10,179 sets of data from 63 peer-reviewed articles, the nitrate removal rate (NRR) and nitrate removal efficiency (NRE) corresponding to the eight abiotic factors by different categories were comprehensively reported. According to this database, this study found the optimal range of abiotic factors for NRR and NRE in WBR were different. Regarding NRR, the optimal range of media age, HRT, C(in), temperature, effluent DOC, DO, pH, and rho(e) were in the first year, 0-5 h, 10-20 mg L(-1), 20-25 degrees C, 0-5 mg L(-1), 0-0.5 mg L(-1), 7-8, and 0.6-0.7, respectively. For NRE, the optimal range of media age, HRT, C(in), temperature, effluent DOC, DO, pH, and rho(e) were in the first year, 500-3000 h, 0-10 mg L(-1), 10-15 degrees C, >50 mg L(-1), 0-0.5 mg L(-1), 4-5, and 0.4-0.5, respectively. Moreover, the principal component analysis (PCA) indicated the field studies' principal components were different from laboratory studies. Furthermore, the structural equation modeling (SEM) also revealed the causal relationship of the eight abiotic factors on NRR and NRE is totally different. Lessons from this study can be incorporated into DNBR designs, especially improving nitrate removal rates by optimizing different abiotic factors. It also provides insights regarding the contributions of different abiotic factors for NRR and NRE independently and comprehensively.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactor (WBR) is commonly used to remove nitrate from drainage and runoff. However, the efficiency of nitrate removal in WBR is highly variable due to the properties of filling materials. In this study, we investigated the potential of recycling two waste materials, biochar (B) and silage leachate (SL), to enhance nitrate removal by providing a better living habitat and extra available carbon for denitrification. We constructed twelve lab-scale bioreactors with different filling materials (WBR, WBR + B, WBR + SL, WBR + B + SL), hydraulic retention times (HRT: 0.5-24 h), and nitrate concentrations (5.4-33 mg L(-1)) to test nitrate removal efficiency (NRE) and nitrate removal rate (NRR). Our results showed that the combination of biochar and silage leachate led to the highest NRE and NRR, with improvements of 23% and 48%, respectively, compared to WBR alone. However, the benefits of adding biochar and silage leachate were less apparent at longer HRTs. According to the results of our structural equation modeling (SEM), we have attributed the improved denitrification to several factors. These factors include the decrease in dissolved oxygen, saturated hydraulic conductivity, and pH value, as well as an increase in dissolved organic carbon after the addition of silage leachate. Therefore, our study provides evidence that recycling biochar and silage leachate as an additive to WBR could be a beneficial strategy for enhancing nitrate removal. Overall, this study highlights the potential of a win-win solution to improve the efficiency of nitrate removal in water treatment processes.},
   abstract = {Different factors affect the performance of denitrifying bioreactors. Hydraulic retention time (HRT), carbon source, and microbial community genus are three of the most important factors that affect the performance of denitrifying bioreactors. This study aimed to evaluate the best possible case of these factors. So, this study reviewed 43 papers between 2016 and 2023. Woodchips with 50% of particles >13 mm are recommended to be used in denitrifying bioreactors. Also, sedge, straw, and potato residues have better performance in comparison with woodchip. It can be seen that the performance of bioreactors is optimized at HRTs higher than 24 h. Microbial community genus belongs to Pseudomonas family bacteria, and Thauera and Halomonas species have an acceptable efficiency in unfavorable conditions.},
   abstract = {Denitrifying bioreactors can be effective for removing nitrate from agricultural tile drainage; however, questions about cold springtime performance persist. The objective of this study was to improve the nitrate removal rate (NRR) of denitrifying bioreactors at warm and cold temperatures using agriculturally derived media rather than wood chips (WC). Corn ( L.) cobs (CC), corn stover (CS), barley ( L.) straw (BS), WC, and CC followed by a compartment of WC (CC+WC) were tested in laboratory columns for 5 mo at a 12-h hydraulic residence time in separate experiments at 15.5 and 1.5 degrees C. Nitrate-N removal rates ranged from 35 to 1.4 at 15.5 degrees C and from 7.4 to 1.6 g N m d at 1.5 degrees C, respectively; NRRs were ranked CC > CC+WC > BS = CS > WC and CC >/= CC+WC = CS >/= BS > WC for 15.5 and 1.5 degrees C, respectively. Although NRRs for CC were increased relative to WC, CC released greater amounts of carbon. Greater abundance of nitrous oxide (NO) reductase gene () was supported by crop residues than WC at 15.5 degrees C, and CS and BS supported greater abundance than WC at 1.5 degrees C. Production of NO relative to nitrate removal (NO) was consistently greater at 1.5 degrees C (7.5% of nitrate removed) than at 15.5 degrees C (1.9%). The NO was lowest in CC (1.1%) and CC-WC (0.9%) and greatest in WC (9.7%). Using a compartment of agricultural residue media in series before wood chips has the potential to improve denitrifying bioreactor nitrate removal rates, but field-scale verification is needed.},
   abstract = {Cold temperatures limit nitrate-N load reductions of woodchip bioreactors in higher-latitude climates. This two-year, on-farm (Willmar, Minnesota, USA) study was conducted to determine whether field-scale nitrate-N removal of woodchip bioreactors can be improved by the addition of cold-adapted, locally isolated bacterial denitrifying strains (bioaugmentation) or dosing with a carbon (C) source (biostimulation). In Spring 2017, biostimulation removed 66% of the nitrate-N load, compared to 21% and 18% for bioaugmentation and control, respectively. The biostimulation nitrate-N removal rate (NRR) was also significantly greater, 15.0 g N m-3 d-1, versus 5.8 and 4.4 g N m-3 d-1, for bioaugmentation and control, respectively. After five weeks of operation, bioclogging of the biostimulation beds limited dosing for the remainder of the experiment; NRR was greater for biostimulation in Fall 2017, but in Spring 2018 there were no differences among treatments. Carbon dosing did not increase outflow of dissolved organic C concentration. The abundance of one of the inoculated strains, Cellulomonas cellacea strain WB94, increased over time, while another, Microvirgula aerodenitrificans strain BE2.4, increased briefly, returning to background levels after 42 d. Eleven days after inoculation in Spring 2017, outflow nitrate-N concentrations of bioaugmentation were sporadically reduced compared to the control for two weeks, but the effects were insignificant over the study period. The study suggests that biostimulation and bio-augmentation are promising technologies to enhance nitrate removal during cold conditions. A means of con-trolling bioclogging is needed for biostimulation, and improved means of inoculation and maintaining abundance of introduced strains is needed for bioaugmentation. In conclusion, biostimulation showed greater potential than bioaugmentation for increasing nitrate removal in a woodchip bioreactor, whereas both methods need improvement before implementation at the field scale.},
   abstract = {Denitrification beds are being used to reduce the transport of water-soluble nitrate via subsurface drainage systems to surface water. Only recently has the non-linearity of water flow through woodchips been ascertained. To successfully design and model denitrification beds with optimum nitrate removal, a better understanding of flow in denitrification beds is needed. The main objectives of this study were to characterize the hydraulic properties of old degraded woodchips and provide a better understanding of the factors affecting flow. To achieve this goal, we conducted constant-head column experiments using old woodchips that were excavated from a four-year old denitrification bed near Willmar, Minnesota, USA. For Izbash's equation, the non-Darcy exponent (n) ranged from 0.76 to 0.87 that indicates post-linear regime, and the permeability coefficient (M-10) at 10 degrees C ranged from 0.9 to 2.6 cm s(-1). For Forchheimer's equation, the intrinsic permeability of 5.6 x 10(-5) cm(2) and omega constant of 0.40 (at drainable porosity of 0.41) closely resembled the in-situ properties found in a previous study. Forchheimer's equation was better than that of Izbash's for describing water flow through old woodchips, and the coefficients of the former provided stronger correlations with drainable porosity. The strong correlation between intrinsic permeability and drainable porosity showed that woodchip compaction is an important factor affecting water flow through woodchips. Furthermore, we demonstrated the importance of temperature effects on woodchip hydraulics. In conclusion, the hydraulic properties of old woodchips should be characterized using a non-Darcy equation to help design efficient systems with optimum nitrate removal. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.},
   abstract = {Fertilizers replenish soil nutrients removed by crops and help in producing high yielding crops, but the overuse of these fertilizers can have a detrimental effect on the receiving waters. There is a need for better management practices and remediation techniques to reduce and potentially eliminate the transport of nutrients from agricultural lands. The objective of this study was to evaluate the removal of orthophosphate using an industrial waste (iron turnings) as well as examine the synergistic effects of using it in conjunction with a woodchip bioreactor known to have a high affinity for nitrate-N removal. A laboratory-scale column reactor was constructed using the iron-based material and woodchips as reactor media. Synergism was displayed as a result of alternating media arrangement with the observation of 25% higher reduction in nitrate-N concentrations, on average, as a result of interaction with woodchips when woodchips were downstream of steel turnings as opposed to upstream. This was also demonstrated in the orthophosphate results, where woodchips reduced orthophosphate concentrations by 8.54% on average when upstream of steel turnings, but yielded a net increase in orthophosphate concentration (23.8% of initial concentration on average) by converting bound phosphate back to orthophosphate when downstream of steel turnings. This led to a final experiment where the steel turnings were placed both upstream and downstream of woodchips. This confirmed earlier findings of enhanced nitrate-N removal by woodchips downstream of iron, while showing that the second iron section downstream of woodchips could once again remove orthophosphate from solution down to non-detectable concentrations. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.},
   abstract = {Reactive barriers, such as denitrifying bioreactors, have been identified as a clean-up option for nutrient-laden agriculture runoff. Here we tested a 20 m long, 3.75 m wide and 2.2 m deep woodchip bioreactor receiving tile drainage water from a 5.2 ha field site, aiming at testing the hydraulic functioning of a dual-inlet system and quantifying its impact on nutrient loads (nitrogen, reactive phosphorus, organic carbon) in a region with a drainage season taking place in the hydrological winter (November to April). The hydraulic conditions in the dual-inlet bioreactor system developed differently than expected; asymmetric flow rates led to long average hydraulic retention times and a highly dispersed residence time distribution, which was revealed by a bromide tracer test. With a nitrate load reduction of 51 to 90% over three drainage seasons, the woodchip bioreactor proved at the same time to be very effective under the winter conditions of northeastern Germany. The bioreactor turned from an orthophosphate source in the first year of operation into an orthophosphate sink in the second and third year, which was not expected because of anoxic conditions (favorable for denitrification) prevailing within the woodchips. Besides an efficient nutrient retention, the woodchip bioreactor contributed to the total organic carbon load of receiving waters, which impairs the overall positive role of bioreactors within intensively agriculturally used landscapes. We consider this promising low-maintenance biotechnology particularly suitable for single drainage pipes with high discharge and high nitrate concentrations.},
   abstract = {Treatment of drainage from agricultural production systems is one means to help improve water quality. Treatment of multiple pollutants, such as nitrogen and phosphorus together is a desirable attribute of systems that treat drainage and runoff from agricultural fields. In this study, the performance of inline woodchip (WC) only and woodchip bioreactors amended with 10% and 20% (vol) alum-based drinking water treatment plant residuals (WTR), were evaluated for treatment of N, P, and veterinary antibiotic compounds in tile drainage from field plots during, primarily, the < 5 degrees C non-growing season (fall 2013 to spring 2014) following land application of liquid swine manure (LSM) in fall. Removal efficiencies for both WC + 10% WTR and WC + 20% WTR amended bioreactors were significantly greater than woodchip only bioreactors for nitrate (NO3-N), total phosphorus (TP), and dissolved reactive P (DRP) (p < 0.05). Median removal efficiencies for NO3-N ranged from 33% (WC) to 74% (WC + 20% WTR). For total P, median removal efficiencies ranged between 28% (WC) to 64% (WC + 10% WTR), and for DRP they ranged between 35% (WC) to 89% (WC + 10% WTR). Removal efficiencies for NH4-N were not significantly different between WTR-amended and woodchip bioreactors. Removal efficiencies for a suite of veterinary antibiotic parent and transformation products, such as tylosin, chlortetracycline, and isochlortetracycline, were very high for all treatment systems (> 80%); albeit often input concentrations were in the lower ng L-1 range. This study demonstrated the utility of reusing industrial waste products in bioreactors designed to treat tile drainage effluent from agricultural field plots over a Canadian winter period following the land application of liquid swine manure. (C) 2016 Published by Elsevier B. V.},
   abstract = {Temperature significantly influences nitrate removal rates in woodchip bioreactors (WBRs), which are increasingly being adopted as engineered natural treatment systems for urban stormwater, agricultural drainage, and wastewater. In this study, three replicate columns with 15 month aged woodchips were operated under steady-state conditions with a synthetic stormwater matrix at three measured flow rates and in four temperature-controlled settings (4-30 degrees C). Dissolved oxygen (DO), nitrate, and dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentrations were measured along the depth profiles of the columns. Temperature explained 45% of the variance in the measured nitrate removal rates and 40% of the variance in the measured DOC production rates. We used these data to adapt our previously-developed and validated WBR mechanistic model for different temperatures, flow rates, and influent nitrate concentrations. DO inhibition influenced nitrate removal rates at influent nitrate concentrations <2 mg-N L-1; above that, nitrate removal could be effectively modeled as a zero-order reaction with temperature dependence using a simplified Arrhenius equation with a temperature coefficient (theta) of 1.16. The high temperature dependence suggests WBRs may be most cost/space efficient in applications with elevated water temperatures, such as wastewater effluent. We applied WBRs to a case study scenario site in Sonoma County, California. Temperature and variable flow led to a 3-6X higher annual nitrate removal rate in wastewater effluent than stormwater. Comparing nitrogen removal technologies, WBRs were the lowest cost per kg N removed using existing infrastructure to comply with future wastewater N restrictions to San Francisco Bay in a cost-efficient, environmentally-friendly manner.},
   abstract = {Woodchip denitrification bioreactors are a relatively new, edge-of-field technology used to reduce nitratenitrogen (NO3-N) from subsurface tile drainage. The removal rate of nitrate is influenced by many factors, including temperature, dissolved oxygen, and hydraulic residence time (HRT). The objective of this study was to conduct a techno-economic analysis (TEA) for four scales of woodchip denitrification bioreactors operating at three HRTs (2, 8, and 16 h), designed with bypass flow or with a low probability of bypass flow, to determine the cost to remove 1 kg of NO3-N at each bioreactor scale and at each HRT. Several assumptions were made: the flow rate required to achieve a 2 h HRT on a per m3 basis could be achieved at all scales, the same mass removal of NO3-N was achieved on a per cubic meter basis, and the 2 h HRT did not have any bypass flow at each scale. With these assumptions, the lowest unit cost was observed for the large-scale bioreactor sized to have a low probability of bypass flow at 16 h HRT, with a resulting cost of $0.74 kg(-1) NO3-N removed. The highest unit cost was observed for the pilot-scale bioreactor designed with bypass flow to achieve a 16 h HRT at a cost of $60.13 kg(-1) NO3-N removed. At longer HRTs with bypass flow, a greater percent removal of nitrate has been observed with a lower mass removal rate. By having a low probability of bypass flow in the design, a higher mass removal and percent removal of nitrate were observed, leading to the above results. Contrasting this trend, the total and annual costs were highest for the large-scale bioreactor and lowest for the pilot-scale bioreactor. However, it was determined that 783%, 280%, and 54% increases in total cost for the pilot-, small-, and medium-scale bioreactors would be incurred to implement the number of bioreactors (66, 24, and 4, respectively) required to treat the same volume of flow as one large bioreactor. These results can be used to inform future design decisions and inform stakeholders of the approximate unit cost of installing a denitrifying woodchip bioreactor over a range of expected field conditions. While a larger bioreactor with a low probability of bypass flow may represent a more cost-effective investment, the potential for unintended, negative by-products needs to be considered in the design.},
   abstract = {Woodchip denitrifying bioreactors mitigate nitrate loading from agricultural tile effluents. Biochar is considered as an amendment to woodchips. Research findings are contradictory regarding the effect of biochar on nitrate removal. The current study is aimed at investigating the effect of biochar on the removal of nitrate in denitrifying bioreactors. For this purpose, laboratory and field experiments were carried out. In the laboratory, cylindrical up-flow bioreactors were used that were filled with woodchips and oxidized biochar at rates of 0%, 12.5%, 25%, 50% by volume. The removal of nitrate was investigated at two stages: unaged and aged for 16 weeks. The bioreactors were operated at four hydraulic retention times of 2, 4, 8, and 24 h. Additionally, we measured the concentrations of greenhouse gases in the laboratory bioreactors. In the field, nitrate removal over a 6-year period was investigated in two denitrifying bioreactors, one of which amended with 10% fresh biochar.
The laboratory experiments showed that, on average, oxidized biochar (OB) amendment reduced nitrate removal by 9% in unaged and 13% in aged bioreactors while the respiration was equal or greater. This led us to conclude that oxidized biochar acted as an electron acceptor. In addition, oxidized biochar increased greenhouse gas concentrations. In the field bioreactors, fresh biochar initially increased nitrate removal. However, biochar became less effective over six years.
   abstract = {High levels of nitrogen originating from blasting operations, for example at mining sites or quarries, risk contaminating water bodies through leaching from waste rock dumps. Woodchip bioreactors can be a simple and cost-effective way of reducing nitrate concentrations in the leachate. In this study we investigated how bottle sedge, barley straw, and pine woodchips used as electron donors for denitrification influenced microbial community composition and nitrate removal in lab-scale bioreactors during 270 days. The reactors were operated to ensure that nitrate was never limiting and to achieve similar nitrate removal (%). Distinct bacterial communities developed due to the different substrates, as determined by sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene. Sedge and straw reactors shared more taxa with each other than with woodchips and throughout the experimental period, sedge and straw were more diverse than woodchips. Cellulose degrading bacteria like Fibrobacteres and Verrucomicrobia were detected in the substrates after 100-150 days of operation. Nitrate removal rates were highest in the sedge and straw reactors. After initial fluctuations, these reactors removed 5.1-6.3 g N m(-3) water day(-1), which was 3.3-4.4 times more than in the woodchip reactors. This corresponded to 48%, 42%, and 44% nitrate removal for the sedge, straw, and woodchip reactors respectively. The functional communities were characterized by quantitative PCR and denitrification was the major nitrate removing process based on genetic potential and water chemistry, although sedge and straw developed a capacity for ammonification. Gene ratios suggested that denitrification was initially incomplete and terminating with nitrous oxide. An increase in abundances of nitrous oxide reducing capacity in all substrate types towards the end increased the potential for less emissions of the greenhouse gas nitrous oxide.},
   abstract = {Mining activities are increasingly recognized for contributing to nitrogen (N) pollution and possibly also to emissions of the greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N(2)O) due to undetonated, N-based explosives. A woodchip denitrifying bioreactor, installed to treat nitrate-rich leachate from waste rock dumps in northern Sweden, was monitored for two years to determine the spatial and temporal distribution of microbial communities, including the genetic potential for different N transformation processes, in pore water and woodchips and how this related to reactor N removal capacity. About 80 and 65 % of the nitrate was removed during the first and second operational year, respectively. There was a succession in the microbial community over time and in space along the reactor length in both pore water and woodchips, which was reflected in reactor performance. Nitrate ammonification likely had minimal impact on N removal efficiency due to the low production of ammonium and low abundance of the key gene nrfA in ammonifiers. Nitrite and N(2)O were formed in the bioreactor and released in the effluent water, although direct N(2)O emissions from the surface was low. That these unwanted reactive N species were produced at different times and locations in the reactor indicate that the denitrification pathway was temporally as well as spatially separated along the reactor length. We conclude that the succession of microbial communities in woodchip denitrifying bioreactors treating mining water develops slowly at low temperature, which impacts reactor performance.},
   abstract = {Woodchip denitrification bioreactors, a relatively new technology for edge-of-field treatment of subsurface agricultural drainage water, have shown potential for nitrate removal. However, few studies have evaluated the performance of these reactors under varied controlled conditions including initial woodchip age and a range of hydraulic retention times (HRTs) and temperatures similar to the field. This study investigated (i) the release of total organic C (TOC) during reactor start up for fresh and weathered woodchips, (ii) nitrate (NO-N) removal at HRTs ranging from 2 to 24 h, (iii) nitrate removal at influent NO-N concentrations of 10, 30, and 50 mg L, and (iv) NO-N removal at 10, 15, and 20 degrees C. Greater TOC was released during bioreactor operation with fresh woodchips, whereas organic C release was low when the columns were packed with naturally weathered woodchips. Nitrate-N concentration reductions increased from 8 to 55% as HRT increased. Nitrate removal on a mass basis (g NO-N m d) did not follow the same trend, with relatively consistent mass removal measured as HRT increased from 1.7 to 21.2 h. Comparison of mean NO-N load reduction for various influent NO-N concentrations showed lower reduction at an influent concentration of 10 mg L and higher NO-N reductions at influent concentrations of 30 and 50 mg L. Nitrate-N removal showed a stepped increase with temperature. Temperature coefficient () factors calculated from NO-N removal rates ranged from 2.2 to 2.9.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors have been increasingly used as an edge-of-field treatment technology to reduce the nitrate loadings to surface waters from agricultural subsurface drainage. Recent studies have shown that subsurface drainage can also contribute substantially to the loss of phosphate from agricultural soils. The objective of this study was to investigate nitrate and phosphate removal in subsurface drainage using laboratory woodchip bioreactors and recycled steel byproduct filters. The woodchip bioreactor demonstrated average nitrate removal efficiencies of 53.5-100% and removal rates of 10.1-21.6 g N/m(3)/d for an influent concentration of 20 mg N/L and hydraulic retention times (HRTs) of 6-24 h. When the influent nitrate concentration increased to 50 mg N/L, the bioreactor nitrate removal efficiency and rate averaged 75% and 18.9 g N/m(3)/d at an HRT of 24 h. Nitrate removal by the woodchips followed zero-order kinetics with rate constants of 1.42-1.80 mg N/L/h when nitrate was non-limiting. The steel byproduct filter effectively removed phosphate in the bioreactor effluent and the total phosphate adsorption capacity was 3.70 mg P/g under continuous flow conditions. Nitrite accumulation occurred in the woodchip bioreactor and the effluent nitrite concentrations increased with decreasing HRTs and increasing influent nitrate concentrations. The steel byproduct filter efficiently reduced the level of nitrite in the bioreactor effluent. Overall, the results of this study suggest that woodchip denitrification followed by steel byproduct filtration is an effective treatment technology for nitrate and phosphate removal in subsurface drainage.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors that stimulate denitrification are proposed to reduce nitrogen (N) loads emanating from subsurface agricultural drainage. However, agricultural drainage water contains both N and phosphorus (P), frequently in concentrations exceeding environmental criteria. A mixed-media bioreactor containing woodchips plus reactive media that binds soluble P could concurrently lower both N and P loads in subsurface agricultural drainage. This study evaluated the P concentration and load reductions achieved with woodchip and mixed-media bioreactors in full-scale field installations in the cold, humid climate of Quebec, Canada, during a three-year period. Bioreactors contained either woodchips-only or woodchips plus an activated alumina/gravel mixture (mixed media). Total P, particulate P, soluble P, soluble reactive P, and soluble organic P concentrations and loads for the bioreactor influents and effluents were assessed weekly and also following > 10 mm rainfall events. In the first two months of operation, both woodchips-only and mixed-media bioreactors released P but became either a negligible source or net sink for P retention within the first year of operation. While the mixed-media bioreactor had 9% lower total P concentration and about 19 times greater reduction in total P load than woodchips-only bioreactors during the study period, the total P concentration was not reduced to the critical environmental threshold level of 0.03 mg L-1 with either bioreactor type. Both configurations were effective at reducing the soluble P fraction, especially the soluble reactive P species that are bioavailable and thus contribute directly to eutrophication. A woodchips-only bioreactor can adsorb P from subsurface agricultural drainage; however, a woodchips bioreactor containing the activated alumina/gravel mixture has greater P sorption capacity and should be considered as part of an integrated system for concurrent N and P removal from subsurface agricultural drainage.},
   abstract = {Denitrifying woodchip bioreactors (WBRs) are a nature-based technology that are increasingly used to control nonpoint source nitrate (NO(3)(-)) pollution in agricultural catchments. The treatment effectiveness of WBRs depends on temperature and hydraulic retention time (HRT), both of which are affected by climate change. Warmer temperatures will increase microbial denitrification rates, but the extent to which the resulting benefits to treatment performance may be offset by intensified precipitation and shorter HRTs is not clear. Here, we use three years of monitoring data from a WBR in Central New York State to train an integrated hydrologic-biokinetic model describing links among temperature, precipitation, bioreactor discharge, denitrification kinetics, and NO(3)(-) removal efficiencies. Effects of climate warming are assessed by first training a stochastic weather generator with eleven years of weather data from our field site, and then adjusting the distribution of precipitation intensities according to the Clausius-Clapeyron relationship between water vapor and temperature. Modeling results indicate, in our system, faster denitrification rates will outweigh the influence of intensified precipitation and discharge under warming, leading to net improvements in NO(3)(-) load reductions. Median cumulative NO(3)(-) load reductions at our study site from May - October are projected to increase from 21.7% (interquartile range 17.4%-26.1%) under baseline hydro-climate to 41.0% (interquartile range 32.6-47.1%) with a + 4 degrees C change in mean air temperature. This improved performance under climate warming is driven by strong nonlinear dependence of NO(3)(-) removal rates on temperature. Temperature sensitivity may increase with woodchip age and lead to stronger temperature-response in systems like this one with a highly aged woodchip matrix. While the impacts of hydro-climatic change on WBR performance will depend on site-specific properties, this hydrologic-biokinetic modeling approach provides a framework for assessing climate impacts on the effectiveness of WBRs and other denitrifying nature-based systems.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactor technology removes nitrate from agricultural subsurface drainage by using denitrifying microorganisms. Although woodchip bioreactors have demonstrated success in many field locations, low water temperature can significantly limit bioreactor efficiency and performance. To improve bioreactor performance, it is important to identify the microbes responsible for nitrate removal at low temperature conditions. Therefore, in this study, we identified and characterized denitrifiers active at low-temperature conditions by using culture-independent and -dependent approaches. By comparative 16S rRNA (gene) analysis and culture isolation technique, Pseudomonas spp., Polaromonas spp., and Cellulomonas spp. were identified as being important bacteria responsible for denitrification in woodchip bioreactor microcosms at relatively low temperature conditions (15 degrees C). Genome analysis of Cellulomonas sp. strain WB94 confirmed the presence of nitrite reductase gene nirK. Transcription levels of this nirK were significantly higher in the denitrifying microcosms than in the non-denitrifying microcosms. Strain WB94 was also capable of degrading cellulose and other complex polysaccharides. Taken together, our results suggest that Cellulomonas sp. denitrifiers could degrade woodchips to provide carbon source and electron donors to themselves and other denitrifiers in woodchip bioreactors at low-temperature conditions. By inoculating these denitrifiers (i.e., bioaugmentation), it might be possible to increase the nitrate removal rate of woodchip bioreactors at low-temperature conditions.},
   abstract = {Denitrifying bioreactors are dependent on organic matter supply as a substrate for effective NO removal. In this study, the difference in removal efficiency and side effects when using different organic matter sources and dosing strategies was tested in two field experiments. The organic matter sources tested were woodchips and ethanol. The effect of woodchips was tested using woodchip-enveloped drains. Ethanol was supplied to a flow-through reactor by passive dosing by diffusion through silicone tubing. The woodchip-enveloped drains showed a removal efficiency of 80% during the first year of application, but this rate decreased during the second and third years of application, coinciding with a decrease in dissolved organic C and an increase in redox potential. The removal efficiency was higher and remained higher over a longer period of time when the drains were installed more deeply. The flow-through reactor with ethanol could lead to a higher removal efficiency (up to 95%) at higher hydraulic retention time (HRT, 0.1 d) than the woodchip-enveloped drains (HRT = 5 d). Passive dosing of organic substrates is simple, needs little maintenance and no energy, and can be performed independent of electricity. A denitrifying bioreactor with a controlled drainage inlet and outlet is a promising setup for optimizing N removal and minimizing side effects.},
   abstract = {There is a general understanding in the scientific community as to how denitrifying bioreactors operate, but we lack a quantitative understanding of the details of the denitrification process acting within them and comprehensive models for simulating their performance. We hypothesized that nitrate transport through woodchip bioreactors would be best described by a dual-porosity transport model where the bioreactor water is divided into a mobile domain (i.e., the water between the woodchips where it is free to flow and solute movement is by advection and dispersion) and an immobile domain of water (i.e., the water mostly within the woodchips that is stagnant and where solute movement is by diffusion alone). We calibrated the dual-porosity model contained in the HYDRUS model for a woodchip bioreactor using the results of a Br breakthrough experiment where we treated Br as a conservative nonadsorbing tracer. We then used the resulting model parameters to describe 2 yr of NO transport and denitrification within a bioreactor supplied by tile drainage. The only model parameters fitted to the NO data were either the zero- or first-order denitrification rate and its temperature dependence. The bioreactor denitrified 2.23 kg N (38%) of the NO entering it in 2013 and 3.73 kg N (49%) of the NO that entered it in 2014. The dual-porosity model fit the NO data very well, with fitted zero-order reaction rates of 8.7 and 6.8 mg N L d in 2013 and 2014, respectively, and corresponding first-order reaction rates of 0.99 and 1.02 d. For the 2-yr data set, both reaction rate models fit the data equally well. Consistent model parameters fitted for the 2 yr indicated that the model used was robust and a promising approach for modeling fate and transport of NO in woodchip bioreactors.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors (WBRs) are biological systems designed to prevent excess nitrate (NO(3)(-)) leaching from agricultural fields to aquatic ecosystems. Nitrate is removed by microbial denitrification, but the enzyme-mediated process slows down at cold temperatures (<10 degrees C), where NO(3)(-) removal in WBRs can be less than 20%. We studied the use of bacterial bioaugmentation in replicated test-scale WBRs ( approximately 0.1 m(3)) as an environmental technology to increase NO(3)(-) removal at cold temperatures. Nitrate removal rates increased following injection of a nitrate-reducing inoculum (Pseudomonas proteolytica and Klebsiella sp.), but the effect disappeared within a week and was reproduced in control WBRs by injection of sterile medium (phosphate buffer saline). Metagenome analyses showed a shift in the bacterial community composition after bioaugmentation in the planktonic phase of the woodchip reactors, but not in the solid phase (woodchip matrix). Only in the planktonic phase, Pseudomonas and Klebsiella increased their relative abundance as monitored by 16S rRNA gene sequences. In addition, an increased abundance of genes related to NO(3)(-) transformation after bacterial inoculation was observed in the metagenomic sequences. After one week, bacterial community composition became similar to its initial state, indicating resilience of the WBR microbial communities. We conclude that improved inoculation methods are needed to unlock the potential of bioaugmentation to increase NO(3)(-) removal at cold temperatures and make it a relevant technology for practical use at field-scale.},
   abstract = {Aquaculture needs practical solutions for nutrient removal to achieve sustainable fish production. Passive denitrifying bioreactors may provide an ecological, low-cost and low-maintenance approach for wastewater nitrogen removal. However, innovative organic materials are needed to enhance nitrate removal from the low carbon effluents in intensive recirculating aquaculture systems (RAS). In this study, we tested three additional carbon sources, including biochar, dried Sphagnum sp. moss and industrial potato residues, to enhance the performance of woodchip bioreactors treating the low carbon RAS wastewater. We assessed nitrate (NO3-) removal and microbial community composition during a oneyear in situ column test with real aquaculture wastewater. We found no significant differences in the NO3- removal rates between the woodchip-only bioreactor and bioreactors with a zone of biochar or Sphagnum sp. moss (maximum removal rate 31-33 g NO3-N m(-3) d(-1)), but potato residues increased NO3- removal rate to 38 g NO3--N m(-3) d(-1), with stable annual reduction efficiency of 93%. The readily available carbon released from potato residues increased NO3--N removal capacity of the bioreactor even at higher inflow concentrations (>52 mg L-1). The microbial community and its predicted functional potential in the potato residue bioreactor differed markedly from those of the other bioreactors. Adding potato residues to woodchip material enabled smaller bioreactor size to be used for NO3- removal. This study introduced industrial potato by-product as an alternative carbon source for the woodchip denitrification process, and the encouraging results may pave the way toward growth of blue bioeconomy using the RAS. (C) 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.},
   abstract = {This study evaluated the performance of pilot-scale denitrifying bioreactors (LWD: 6 x 0.6 x 1m) filled with different carbon substrates, including barley straw, hemp straw, and woodchips, for removing dissolved nitrogen from sim-ulated subsurface drainage at two representative geographic locations in Alberta. In this study, the bioreactors were tested under varying hydraulic retention times (4, 8, and 12 h) in the spring, summer, and fall of one year. Tracer studies were conducted to evaluate flow and dispersion characteristics. The mean of nitrate removal efficiency ranged from 19% to 87% during the spring, 44% to 95% during the summer, and 21% to 68% during the fall. We found that barley straw was more effective in reducing nitrate (45% to 95%) compared to wood chips (19% to 54%). This study is the first testing of the effect of different biomass types and hydraulic residence times on bioreactor performance in the Canadian prairies (Alberta) and will allow agricultural producers and regulators to assess the suitability of these systems within the region.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors have emerged as a viable water management tool to reduce nitrate contamination from agricultural subsurface drainage, wastewater, and stormwater. Understanding of denitrification kinetics is critical to the design and application of field woodchip bioreactors. The denitrification process in woodchip bioreactors generally obeys a model of Michaelis-Menten type enzyme kinetics. The objective of this study was to determine Michaelis-Menten model parameters for nitrate removal in laboratory bioreactors using the fresh, composted and aged woodchips. The results showed that the maximum nitrate removal rates (V(max)) were 2.09, 0.88 and 0.30 mg N/L/h, and the half saturation constants (K(m)) were 2.60, 2.16 and 2.01 mg N/L for the composted, fresh and aged woodchip bioreactors at 22 degrees C. The V(max) values decreased to 0.26 and 0.05 mg N/L/h, and the K(m) values decreased to 1.74 and 1.19 mg N/L when the composted and fresh woodchip bioreactors were operated at 5 degrees C. Denitrification in woodchip bioreactors can be operationally defined as a zero-order reaction when treating contaminated water with nitrate much higher than the K(m) values. The nitrate removal efficiency of the bioreactors followed the order of composted woodchips > fresh woodchips > aged woodchips. The average nitrate load reduction rates were 8.81-21.0, 7.36-9.78, and 2.46-3.54 g N/m(3)/d for the composted, fresh, and aged woodchip bioreactors at influent nitrate concentrations of 10-50 mg N/L and 22 degrees C. Woodchip composting before bioreactor installation can be used as a practical strategy to enhance denitrification performance of bioreactors.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors are capable of removing nitrate from agricultural runoff and subsurface tile drain water, alleviating human health hazards and harmful discharge to the environment. Water pumped from agricultural tile drain sumps to nearby ditches or channels could be cost effectively diverted through a woodchip bioreactor to remove nitrate prior to discharge into local waterways. Sizing the bioreactor to achieve targeted outlet concentrations within a minimum footprint is important to minimizing cost. Determining the necessary bioreactor size should involve a hydrological component as well as reaction type and rates. We measured inflow and outflow nitrate concentrations in a pumped open-channel woodchip bioreactor over a 13-month period and used a tanks-in-series approach to model hydrology and estimate parameter values for reaction kinetics. Both zero-order and first-order reaction kinetics incorporating the Arrhenius equation for temperature dependence were modeled. The zero-order model fit the data better. The rate coefficients (k = 17.5 g N m(-3) day(-1) and theta = 1.12 against T-ref = 20 degrees C) can be used for estimating the size of a woodchip bioreactor to treat nitrate in agricultural runoff from farm blocks on California's central coast. We present an Excel model for our tanks-in-series hydrology to aid in estimating bioreactor size.},
   abstract = {Woodchip denitrification bioreactors are an effective agricultural practice to reduce nitrogen (N) export from subsurface drainage via the conversion of nitrate (NO(3)(-)) to nitrogen gas (N(2)), but there are challenges associated with limited woodchip supplies and increasing prices. Previous lab studies indicate that corncobs could be a promising woodchip alternative from the perspectives of N removal rate and cost. This field study aimed to provide early performance and cost assessment of denitrification bioreactors with two woodchip-corncob treatments. The objectives were to i) compare N removal rates of bioreactors with different carbon and hydraulic retention time (HRT) treatments, ii) compare bioreactor N removal costs, and iii) conduct sensitivity analysis on full-scale bioreactors (FBR) N removal costs with varying corncob lifespans and prices. Nine replicated field pilot-scale bioreactors (PBRs) using three carbon treatments and three HRTs were assessed for N removal efficiency. The carbon treatments were woodchip-only (WC100), 25% (by vol.) corncobs + 75% woodchips media (CC25) in series, and 75% corncobs + 25% woodchips (CC75) in series set at HRTs of 2, 8, and 16 h. N concentrations were monitored at each PBR inlet and outlet, and the PBR N removal efficiencies were used to estimate FBR N removal rates and costs. At respective HRTs, the estimated N removal rates of CC75 were 1.6- to 10.1-fold higher than WC100, but CC25 exhibited 0.9-fold lower (at 8-hr HRT) to 2.8-fold higher than WC100. A 15-yr cost assessment indicated CC75 ($10.56 to $13.89 kg(-1) N) was the most cost-efficient treatment, followed by WC100 ($13.30 to $88.11 kg(-1) N) and CC25 ($22.41 to $60.13 kg(-1) N). This assessment showed CC75 as a promising alternative to WC100 in terms of N removal rate and cost, but CC25 did not provide sufficient N removal rate increase for it to be a cost-efficient option. Nonetheless, using corncobs as a bioreactor medium is a relatively new approach, and we encourage more field studies to explore the long-term opportunities and challenges.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors are recognized as an effective best management practice in the Iowa Nutrient Reduction Strategy. This edge-of-field practice intercepts and removes NO3-N, thereby reducing the NO3-N concentration in file drainage before being discharged into surface water. Actual NO3-N load reductions realized by woodchip bioreactors are impacted by bioreactor size, hydraulic retention time (HRT), and denitrification efficiency. A typical woodchip bioreactor in Iowa may have 0.07% bioreactor area with respect to treatment area, 4-8 h HRT, and 43% mean denitrification efficiency. Here, we explored the potential of using electrically stimulated woodchip bioreactors to achieve greater NO3-N removal, and estimated the costs of this approach. Batch experiments were conducted to determine the denitrification efficiency of electrically stimulated and traditional woodchip bioreactors at different HRTs and current densities. The resulting data was used to model costs and denitrification efficiency in 75 scenarios, covering a range of bioreactor volumes, HRTs, current densities, and annual durations of electrical stimulation periods. For each scenario, we reported the estimated annual NO3-N load reduction and NO3-N removal cost. We found that electrically stimulated woodchip bioreactors may remove an additional 37-72% annual NO3-N load than a traditional woodchip bioreactor, but at the expense of higher NO3-N removal costs, which were increased by 138-194%.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors are being implemented for the removal of nitrates in groundwater and tile water drainage. However, low nitrate removals in denitrifying woodchip bioreactors have been observed for short hydraulic retention time (HRT) and low water temperature (< 10 degrees C). One potential approach to improve woodchip bioreactor performance is to provide an alternative and readily available electron source to the denitrifying microorganisms through electrical stimulation. Previous work has demonstrated the capability of bio-electrochemical reactors (BER) to remove a variety of water contaminants, including nitrate, in the presence of a soluble carbon source. The objective of this study was to evaluate the denitrification efficiency of electrically augmented woodchip bioreactors and conduct a simple techno-economic analysis (TEA) to understand the possibilities and limitations for full-scale BER implementation for treatment of agricultural drainage. Up-flow column woodchip bioreactors were studied included two controls (non-energized, and without electrodes), two electrically enhanced bioreactors, each using a single 316 stainless steel anode coupled with graphite cathodes, and two electrically enhanced bioreactors, each with graphite for both anode and cathodes. Both pairs of electrically enhanced bioreactors demonstrated higher denitrification efficiencies than controls when 500 mA of current was applied. While this technology appeared promising, the techno-economic analysis showed that the normalized N removal cost ($/kg N) for BERs was 2-10 times higher than the base cost with no electrical stimulation. With our current reactor design, opportunities to make this technology cost effective require denitrification efficiency of 85% at 100 mA. This work informs the process and design of electrically stimulated woodchip bioreactors with optimized performance to achieve lower capital and maintenance costs, and thus lower N removal cost.},
   abstract = {Denitrifying "woodchip" bioreactors are engineered systems, consisting of a carbon filled trench (e.g., with woodchips), designed to remediate nitrogen (N)-enriched water through naturally occurring denitrification, a process where microbes reduce nitrate into inert di-nitrogen gas during their respiration processes. Recent studies have demonstrated the feasibility of woodchip bioreactors for treating aquacultural wastewater, specifically the concentrated effluents generated from recirculating aquaculture (RAS), with the caveat that system lifespan can be reduced from clogging associated with high organic solids loading and bacterial overgrowth. Because this technology is relatively new, particularly for aquaculture applications, lifetime cost-efficiency has not been fully assessed. A cost-estimate of N removal over a one- to five-year anticipated lifespan was obtained by estimating initial capital, recurring, and operational expenditures of a full-scale bioreactor system designed for a RAS production facility, using N removal rates from previous pilot-scale aquaculture wastewater bioreactor research. Assumptions included static N removal rates of 6.06 or 11.75 kg of N removal per year for conservative and maximum sensitivities, respectively 49 and 71% N removal efficiency, and at least one woodchip replacement over the system lifetime across a ten-year planning horizon. Initial capital expenditure totaled $47,838 or roughly $139.88 per m(3) installed with woodchip replacements each $19,469. Ten-year operational expenditure total present value costs included of $3737 for water quality work and $4666 for lifetime maintenance. Cost per kg of N removed per year ranged from $13.35 to $2.83, dependent on woodchip replacement scenarios of one- to five-years, respectively, which demonstrated denitrification bioreactors might offer a low-cost N treatment option for aquacultural farmers.},
   abstract = {Recirculating aquaculture systems (RAS) facilities subject to point-source effluent regulations need to implement cost-effective N remediation for their wastewater outflows. Relatively low-cost denitrifying "woodchip" bioreactors can effectively remove N from aquaculture effluents for at least one year, but questions remain about bioreactor lifespan for aquacultural wastewaters. Four pilot-scale bioreactors (L x W x D; 3.8 x 0.76 x 0.76 m), two with a conventional single distribution inflow manifold and two with an experimental multiple-header, feed-forward distribution manifold, were operated over 784 d to observe second-year N removal performance and to determine if the manifold design can influence bioreactor effectiveness. The study also quantified performance metrics for chemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, and phosphorus. Manifold style did not have notable impact on bioreactor performance when treating wastewater under the facilities' normal operating conditions, but the multiple distribution style demonstrated an 11 % increase in nitrate and 12 % increase in total suspended solids removal efficiency over the single distribution manifold toward the end of the study when bioreactors treated higher strength wastewater. Additionally, bioreactor performance in both manifold designs decreased from an average of 92 % total suspended solids removal efficiency under normal operating conditions to < 76 % when treating the high-strength wastewater. The bior- eactors provided N removal rates of 17 - 25 g NO3-N m(-3 )d(-1) during the second year of study, demonstrating woodchip bioreactors can effectively treat aquaculture effluent for at least two years without major detrimental impacts due to clogging.},
   abstract = {The performance of wood-based denitrifying bioreactors to treat high-nitrate wastewaters from aquaculture systems has not previously been demonstrated. Four pilot-scale woodchip bioreactors (approximately 1:10 scale) were constructed and operated for 268 d to determine the optimal range of design hydraulic retention times (HRTs) for nitrate removal. The bioreactors were operated under HRTs ranging from 6.6 to 55 h with influent nitrate concentrations generally between 20 and 80 mg NO-N L. These combinations resulted in N removal rates >39 g N m d, which is greater than previously reported. These high removal rates were due in large part to the relatively high chemical oxygen demand and warm temperature ( approximately 19 degrees C) of the wastewater. An optimized design HRT may not be the same based on metrics of N removal rate versus N removal efficiency; longer HRTs demonstrated higher removal efficiencies, and shorter HRTs had higher removal rates. When nitrate influent concentrations were approximately 75 mg NO-N L ( = 6 sample events), the shortest HRT (12 h) had the lowest removal efficiency (45%) but a significantly greater removal rate than the two longest HRTs (42 and 55 h), which were N limited. Sulfate reduction was also observed under highly reduced conditions and was exacerbated under prolonged N-limited environments. Balancing the removal rate and removal efficiency for this water chemistry with a design HRT of approximately 24 h would result in a 65% removal efficiency and removal rates of at least 18 g N m d.},
   abstract = {Nitrate and orthophosphate from agricultural activities contribute significantly to nutrient loading in surface water bodies around the world. This study evaluated the efficacy of woodchips and fly ash pellets in tandem to remove nitrate and orthophosphate from simulated agricultural runoff in flow-through tests. The fly ash pellets had previously been developed specifically for orthophosphate removal for this type of application, and the sorption bench testing showed a good promise for flow-through testing. The lab-scale horizontal-flow bioreactor used in this study consisted of an upstream column filled with woodchips followed by a downstream column filled with fly ash pellets (3 and 1 m lengths, respectively; both 0.15 m diameter). Using influent concentrations of 12 mg/L nitrate and 5 mg/L orthophosphate, the woodchip bioreactor section was able to remove 49-85% of the nitrate concentration at three hydraulic retention times ranging from 0.67 to 4.0 h. The nitrate removal rate for woodchips ranged from 40 to 49 g N/m(3)/d. Higher hydraulic retention times (i.e., smaller flow rates) corresponded with greater nitrate load reduction. The fly ash pellets showed relatively stable removal efficiency of 68-75% across all retention times. Total orthophosphate adsorption by the pellets was 0.059-0.114 mg P/g which was far less than the saturated capacity (1.69 mg/g; based on previous work). The fly ash pellets also removed some nitrate and the woodchips also removed some orthophosphate, but these reductions were not significant. Overall, woodchip denitrification followed by fly ash pellet P-sorption can be an effective treatment technology for nitrate and phosphate removal in subsurface drainage.},
   abstract = {Woodchip-based media are increasingly used to remove excess nitrate from groundwater but data on nitrogen removal rates and greenhouse gas formation for different woodchip types, nitrogen loading and temperatures is limited. Here, we present data from a 1-year long column experiment in which the nitrogen removal performance of 4 different aged woodchip media was assessed for a range of nitrogen loading rates at different temperatures. Nitrate removal and greenhouse gas formation (CH4, N2O) were measured under nitrate-replete (excess nitrate in effluent), nitrate-limited (complete nitrate removal) and nitrate-deplete conditions (no nitrate in influent). At 14 degrees C, nitrate removal rates were highest in oak (4.3 g N m-3 day-1) followed by maple/cherry (3.2 g N m-3 day-1), oak/pine (2.2 g N m-3 day-1) and pine (0.4 g N m-3 day-1). At 20 degrees C, nitrate removal rates increased by a factor of 2.6 times in oak, oak/pine and maple/cherry and by a factor of 6 in pine. CH4 and N2O typically did not co-occur in effluent. Maximal effluent CH4 concentrations were observed under nitrate-deplete conditions and CH4 formation rates increased with temperature. In contrast, concentrations of N2O, a denitrification intermediate, were only significantly elevated in partially denitrified effluent under nitrate-replete conditions. The data provided here can help to make more informed decisions on the optimal design of woodchip-based nitrate removing bioreactors to maximize nitrate removal and minimize greenhouse gases formation associated with unavoidable under- and over-treatment of nitrate.},
   abstract = {Two important and large non-point sources of nitrogen in residential areas that adversely affect water quality are stormwater runoff and effluent from on-site treatment systems. These sources are challenging to control due to their variable flow rates and nitrogen concentrations. Denitrifying bioreactors that employ a lignocellulosic wood chip medium contained within a saturated (anoxic) zone are relatively new technology that can be implemented at the local level to manage residential non-point nitrogen sources. In these systems, wood chips serve as a microbial biofilm support and provide a constant source of organic substrate required for denitrification. Denitrifying wood chip bioreactors for stormwater management include biofilters and bioretention systems modified to include an internal water storage zone; for on-site wastewater, they include upflow packed bed reactors, permeable reactive barriers, and submerged wetlands. Laboratory studies have shown that these bioreactors can achieve nitrate removal efficiencies as high as 80-100% but could provide more fundamental insight into system design and performance. For example, the type and size of the wood chips, hydraulic loading rate, and dormant period between water applications affects the hydrolysis rate of the lignocellulosic substrate, which in turn affects the amount and bioavailability of dissolved organic carbon for denitrification. Additional field studies can provide a better understanding of the effect of varying environmental conditions such as ambient temperature, precipitation rates, household water use rates, and idle periods on nitrogen removal performance. Long-term studies are also essential for understanding operations and maintenance requirements and validating mathematical models that integrate the complex physical, chemical, and biological processes occurring in these systems. Better modeling tools could assist in optimizing denitrifying wood chip bioreactors to meet nutrient reduction goals in urban and suburban watersheds.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors have the capability to promote the reduction of reactive nitrogen in the nitrate (NO3- ) form to dinitrogen (N2), a harmless gas in the atmosphere. Nevertheless, during the reaction the potent greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N2O) is produced and can be released if denitrification is not complete. The aim of this experiment was to quantify the effect of a soil cap, the concentration of NO3- inflow and drying-rewetting cycles (DRW) on N2O emissions from bench top bioreactors (BTBs, 36.2 ? 24.2 ? 16.8 cm). The soil cap effect was quantified by comparing the performance of two treatments (n = 3): soil cap (CAP) and soil cap free (UNCAP). The NO3- inflow was simulated by feeding the BTBs with two NO3- concentrations (10 and 5 mg N L-1), and DRW were simulated by saturating and draining the BTBs. Nitrous oxide was quantified in the water samples as well as measured from the surface of the BTBs. The soil cap proved effective at decreasing surface N2O emissions with a reduction of total N2O emissions (calculated as the sum of dissolved N2O and surface N2O emissions) ranging from 30.4 to 42.9%. The NO3- inflow affected dissolved N2O and surface N2O emissions with higher values (average of 3.41 and 0.36 mg m-2 d-1, respectively for CAP, and average of 2.92 and 2.52 mg m- 2 d-1, respectively for UNCAP) measured at high NO3inflow. Drying-rewetting cycles influenced dissolved N2O and surface N2O emissions, with values following rewetting that accounted for more than 56% of the total N2O emissions for both treatments. This study confirmed that soil caps are effective at mitigating N2O emissions and contributed to a better understanding of N2O dynamics induced by two different NO3- inflow concentrations and DRW.},
   abstract = {Nitrate (NO(3)(-)N) export from row crop agricultural systems with subsurface tile drainage continues to be a major water quality concern. Woodchip bioreactors are an effective edge-of-field practice designed to remove NO(3)(-)N from tile drainage. The NO(3)(-)N removal rate of woodchip bioreactors can be impacted by several factors, including hydraulic residence time (HRT). This study examined the impact of three HRTs, 2 h, 8 h, and 16 h, on NO(3)(-)N removal in a set of nine pilot-scale woodchip bioreactors in Central Iowa. NO(3)(-)N concentration reduction from the inlet to the outlet was significantly different for all HRTs (p < 0.05). The 16 h HRT removed the most NO(3)(-)N by concentration (7.5 mg L(-1)) and had the highest removal efficiency at 53.8%. The 8 h HRT removed an average of 5.5 mg L(-1) NO(3)(-)N with a removal efficiency of 32.1%. The 2 h HRT removed an average of 1.3 mg L(-1) NO(3)(-)N with a removal efficiency of 9.0%. The 2 h HRT had the highest NO(3)(-)N mass removal rate (MRR) at 9.0 g m(-3) day(-1), followed by the 8 h HRT at 8.5 g m(-3) day(-1), and the 16 h HRT at 7.4 g m(-3) day(-1), all of which were statistically different (p < 0.05). Significant explanatory variables for removal efficiency were HRT (p < 0.001) and influent NO(3)(-)N concentration (p < 0.001), (R(2) = 0.80), with HRT accounting for 93% contribution. When paired with results from a companion study, the ideal HRT for the bioreactors was 8 h to achieve maximum NO(3)(-)N removal while reducing the impact from greenhouse gas emissions.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors are a practical, low-cost technology for reducing nitrate (NO(3)) loads discharged from agriculture. Traditional methods of quantifying their performance in the field mostly rely on low-frequency, time-based (weekly to monthly sampling interval) or flow-weighted sample collection at the inlet and outlet, creating uncertainty in their performance and design by providing incomplete information on flow and water chemistry. To address this uncertainty, two field bioreactors were monitored in the US and New Zealand using high-frequency, multipoint sampling for in situ monitoring of NO(3)-N concentrations. High-frequency monitoring (sub hourly interval) at the inlet and outlet of both bioreactors revealed significant variability in volumetric removal rates and percent reduction, with percent reduction varying by up to 25 percentage points within a single flow event. Time series of inlet and outlet NO(3) showed significant lag in peak concentrations of 1-3 days due to high hydraulic residence time, where calculations from instantaneous measurements produced erroneous estimates of performance and misleading relationships between residence time and removal. Internal porewater sampling wells showed differences in NO(3) concentration between shallow and deep zones, and "hot spot" zones where peak NO(3) removal co-occurred with dissolved oxygen depletion and dissolved organic carbon production. Tracking NO(3) movement through the profile showed preferential flow occurring with slower flow in deeper woodchips, and slower flow further from the most direct flowpath from inlet to outlet. High-frequency, in situ data on inlet and outlet time series and internal porewater solute profiles of this initial work highlight several key areas for future research.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors are widely used to control nitrogen export from agriculture using denitrification. There is abundant evidence that drying-rewetting (DRW) cycles can promote enhanced metabolic rates in soils. A 287-d experiment investigated the effects of weekly DRW cycles on nitrate (NO) removal in woodchip columns in the laboratory receiving constant flow of nitrated water. Columns were exposed to continuous saturation (SAT) or to weekly, 8-h drying-rewetting (8 h of aerobiosis followed by saturation) cycles (DRW). Nitrate concentrations were measured at the column outlets every 2 h using novel multiplexed sampling methods coupled to spectrophotometric analysis. Drying-rewetting columns showed greater export of total and dissolved organic carbon and increased NO removal rates. Nitrate removal rates in DRW columns increased by up to 80%, relative to SAT columns, although DRW removal rates decreased quickly within 3 d after rewetting. Increased NO removal in DRW columns continued even after 39 DRW cycles, with approximately 33% higher total NO mass removed over each weekly DRW cycle. Data collected in this experiment provide strong evidence that DRW cycles can dramatically improve NO removal in woodchip bioreactors, with carbon availability being a likely driver of improved efficiency. These results have implications for hydraulic management of woodchip bioreactors and other denitrification practices.},
   abstract = {A previously reported experiment showed weekly drying-rewetting (DRW) cycles increase nitrate removal rates in woodchip-based denitrifying bioreactors. A follow-up experiment determined the effect of duration of unsaturated conditions on nitrate removal after rewetting. Three different levels of DRW duration were tested in a 105-d column experiment (n = 2), with woodchips left unsaturated once a week for either 2 h, 8 h, or 24 h. Increasing duration of unsaturated conditions significantly increased nitrate removal rates. The longest DRW duration of 24 h resulted in the greatest increase in nitrate removal rates, relative to constantly saturated woodchips, with mean rate increases reaching 172% by the end of the experiment. Results suggest nitrate removal in denitrifying bioreactors is carbon limited, with labile carbon made available during aerobic periods of DRW cycles the most likely cause of observed rate increases. Both studies show DRW cycles dramatically increase the nitrate removal efficiency of denitrifying bioreactors.},
   abstract = {Adoption of edge-of-field conservation practices, such as denitrifying bioreactors, may be intrinsically linked to barriers associated with cost. However, most previous bioreactor cost efficiency assessments assumed values for either costs and/or nitrate removal. The objective of this work was to use actual construction costs as well as monitored nitrate removal to develop empirical cost efficiencies for eight full-size bioreactors in Illinois, USA. Capital construction costs were obtained via invoices or personal communications. A cash-flow discounting procedure was used to develop an equal annualized cost for each bioreactor assuming two media recharges over a 24-y planning horizon. These costs were combined with monitored nitrate removal based on one to six years of monitoring per site. Construction costs averaged $12,250 +/- $7520 across the eight sites (or, $16,020 +/- $9960 in 2023 price levels) but considering one of the sites was a paired bioreactor system, costs averaged $10,890 per bioreactor unit. Drainage treatment area-based cost averaged $132/ha-y and treatment area was strongly correlated with capital costs (R(2) = 0.90; p = 0.001). The bioreactors averaged $108/m(3) of woodchips and available federal government conservation programs could have offset an average of 70% of this cost. Monitored nitrate removal across 27 site-years resulted in a median of $33/kg N-y removed. This mass-based cost efficiency was higher than most previous assessments because the monitored nitrate removal for the study sites was lower than has been previously assumed or modeled. Future reporting about bioreactor recharge timing and cost will help guide assessment and planning. Water quality planning efforts should also consider the increasingly important engineering design costs, which were not included here. Suggested research and outreach to improve bioreactor cost efficiencies involves scaling the physical capacity of this technology for larger treatment areas, revisiting the use of low-cost non-standard fill media, and providing practical construction training.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors are a beneficial management practice with increasing use for the sustainable reduction of nitrate in waters discharged from agriculture and urban landscapes. Previous research has shown an interaction between temperature and carbon quality with respect to microbial respiration, which may affect performance of woodchip bioreactors. This study used two previously published data sets of woodchip bioreactors in Spain and the United States that were exposed to weekly drying-rewetting cycles, to better understand the processes driving changes in temperature sensitivity of nitrate removal. The factor by which nitrate removal increased given a 10 degrees C increase in temperature (Q(10)) was used as a metric for temperature sensitivity. Values ofQ(10)for nitrate removal in both experiments ranged from 1.8-3.1 and generally increased over time as woodchips aged. In field bioreactors, mean nitrate removal rate at temperatures 10-15 degrees C and 22-27 degrees C decreased by 36% and 7%, respectively, from the first to second year. Values ofQ(10)increased with amount of time since resaturation of the woodchips following a drying-rewetting cycle. Dynamic calculations ofQ(10)showed changes inQ(10)were not unidirectional. Subsetting the datasets showed thatQ(10)was temperature-dependent and varied according to minimum temperature value and total range in temperature. Results suggest temperature sensitivity of nitrate removal was related to short and long-term changes in carbon quality or availability, consistent with the carbon-quality-temperature hypothesis. When sizing woodchip bioreactors, water quality managers should consider that long-term declines in efficiency will be greatest at lower temperatures.},
   abstract = {Denitrification in woodchip bioreactors (WBRs) treating agricultural drainage and runoff is frequently carbon-limited due to the recalcitrance of carbon (C) in lignocellulosic woodchip biomass. Recent research has shown that redox fluctuations, achieved through periodic draining and re-flooding of WBRs, can increase nitrate removal rates by enhancing the release of labile C during oxic periods. While dying-rewetting (DRW) cycles appear to hold great promise for improving the performance of denitrifying WBRs, redox fluctuations in nitrogen-rich environments are commonly associated with enhanced emissions of the greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N2O) due to inhibition of N2O reduction in microaerophilic conditions. Here, we evaluate the effects of oxic-anoxic cycling associated with DRW on the quantity and quality of C mobilized from woodchips, nitrate removal rates, and N2O accumulation in a complementary set of flow-through and batch laboratory bioreactors at 20 degrees C. Redox fluctuations significantly increased nitrate removal rates from 4.8-7.2 g N m(-3) d(-1) in a continuously saturated (CS) reactor to 9.8-11.2 g N m(-3) d(-1) 24 h after a reactor is drained and re-saturated. Results support the theory that DRW conditions lead to faster NO3- removal rates by increasing mobilization of labile organic C from woodchips, with lower aromaticity in the dissolved C pool of oxic-anoxic reactors highlighting the importance of lignin breakdown to overall carbon release. There was no evidence for greater N2O accumulation, measured as N2O product yields, in the DRW reactors compared to continuously saturated reactors. We propose that greater organic C availability for N2O reducers following oxic periods outweighs the effect of microaerophilic inhibition of N2O reduction in controlling N2O dynamics. Implications of these findings for optimizing DRW cycling to enhance nitrate removal rates in denitrifying WBRs are discussed.},
   abstract = {Woodchip bioreactors (WBRs) are low-cost, passive systems for nonpoint source nitrogen removal at terrestrial-aquatic interfaces. The greenhouse gases nitrous oxide (N(2)O) and methane (CH(4)) can be produced within WBRs, and efforts to reduce N(2)O and CH(4) emissions from WBR systems require improved understanding of the biogeochemical and physical-chemical mechanisms regulating their production, transport, and release. This study evaluates the impact of trapped gas-filled void volumes as sinks of dissolved gases from water and as sources of episodic fluxes when water levels fall. Dissolved gas tracer experiments in a laboratory bioreactor were used to parameterize nonequilibrium advection-dispersion-gas transfer models and quantify trapping of gas-filled voids as a function of antecedent hydrological conditions. Experiments following a water-level rise revealed that up to 24% of the WBR pore volume was occupied by trapped gas phases, which were primarily located in pore spaces inside woodchips. This finding was confirmed with X-ray-computed microtomography. N(2)O (3.3-10%) and CH(4) (4.3-14%) injected into the reactor following a water table rise partitioned into gas-filled voids and were released when water tables fell. In the case of N(2)O, partitioning into trapped gas phases makes N(2)O unavailable for enzymatic reduction, potentially enhancing N(2)O fluxes under fluctuating water levels.},
   abstract = {Denitrifying bioreactors are an effective approach for removing nitrate from a variety of non-point wastewater sources, including agricultural tile drainage. However, compared to alternate mitigation approaches such as constructed wetlands, nitrate removal in bioreactors may decline with time and low temperature, resulting in poor long-term nitrate removal rates. To address the low nitrate removal rates in bioreactors, the addition of an external carbon source has been found to be an effective method for enhancing and maintaining nitrate removal rates. While carbon dosing has led to a significant improvement in nitrate removal, some of the possible adverse effects of carbon dosing, such as clogging and reduction in hydraulic efficiency, remain unknown and need to be investigated. Using observations from both field and mesocosm trials, we compared the hydraulic performance of bioreactors with and without carbon dosing. The pilot-scale field bioreactor (58 m(3) total woodchip volume, 25 m(3) saturated volume, referred to as field bioreactor in this work) treated drainage water from a paddock of a dairy farm. The bioreactor received an exogenous carbon dose of 8% methanol (v/v) at 10 mL min(-1) and 5 mL min(-1) in the 2020 and 2021 drainage seasons, respectively. The field bioreactor had a statistically higher hydraulic conductivity in 2018 when not carbon-dosed of 4601 m day(-1), reducing to 1600 m day(-1) in 2021 which was the second year of carbon dosing. Field observations could not establish whether the addition of liquid carbon could affect the bioreactor's internal hydraulics performance, such as actual hydraulic retention time (AHRT), despite a significant decline in hydraulic conductivity in the field bioreactor. Separate experiments on replicated bioreactor mesocosms were conducted to investigate the effects of carbon dosing on the internal hydraulic parameters of bioreactors. These mesocosm bioreactors had previously been used to study the long-term effects of methanol dosing on bioreactor performance, such as nitrate removal under steady-state conditions. The mesocosm and field bioreactors shared some characteristics, such as the use of methanol as an external carbon source, but the mesocosm experiments were hydrologically controlled contrary to the field bioreactor's transient operating conditions. We found that methanol dosing in either carbon or nitrate limiting conditions had no significant effects (p-value >0.05) on internal hydraulic parameters (e.g., effective utilization of media) when compared to control bioreactors. The present study offers insight into the long-term hydraulic performance of bioreactors and may help develop small-footprint bioreactors that incorporate external carbon dosing.},
   abstract = {Denitrifying bioreactors are effective tools for removing nitrate from agricultural drainage water. However, as woodchips age with time, a shortage of labile carbon supply limits nitrate removal by microbial denitrification when high nitrate pulses occur in drainage waters. In this study, we investigated the potential of methanol dosing at a constant rate to increase nitrate removal rates in a 58 m3 pilot-scale bioreactor (25 m3 saturated volume) installed on a dairy farm for two consecutive drainage seasons. The drainage water in the bioreactor had a mean hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 12.7 days and 13.5 days in the 2020 and 2021 drainage seasons. With 14.4 L of methanol solution (8% v/v) added per day, the seasonal nitrate removal rates were 8.6 g N m−3 d−1 in 2020 and 5.1 g N m−3 d−1 in 2021 when the methanol dosing rate was halved. Both rates (2020 and 2021) were enhanced as compared to seasonal rates of 0.67–1.60 g N m−3 d−1 in previous years (2017 and 2018) when the bioreactor was not dosed. When there were very large pulses of nitrate into the bioreactor, which exhausted added methanol, nitrate was observed at concentrations above limiting ranges (> 3 mg N L−1) at the outlet on several occasions in 2021. Cumulative nitrate load reductions of 1859 g N and 1620 g N occurred in 2020 and 2021, respectively, resulting in overall nitrate removal efficiencies of 85 and 73%, respectively.
Methanol concentrations decreased by order of magnitude along the bioreactor length, from mean inlet concentrations of 327 mg CH3OH-C L−1 in 2020 (higher dosing rate) to concentrations of <50 mg CH3OH-C L−1 at the outlet. The mean methanol removal rates of 106 g CH3OH-C m−3 d−1 in 2020 and 109 g CH3OH-C m−3 d−1 in 2021. A 90% (2020) and 100% (2021) overall methanol removal efficiency was calculated. With methanol dosing, sulfate removal occurred in the bioreactor, with an average sulfate removal rate of 8.5 g SO42−-S m−3 d−1 in 2020 and 0.5 g SO42−-S m−3 d−1 in 2021. This work demonstrated that methanol additions to bioreactors could enhance denitrification rates even when nitrate was limiting without considerable losses of methanol being released to the receiving waters.},
   abstract = {Bioretention has been increasingly used in stormwater runoff treatment. However, its performance was often restricted by poor treatment or even the net leaching of nitrate. To solve this problem, a biochar-woodchip modified bioretention system was developed in this study. The modified system greatly enhanced the nitrogen removal than the conventional sand bioretention system. The nitrate removal efficiency in the modified bio-retention system ranges between 46.8 +/- 21.1% and 73.6 +/- 6.5%, much higher than the conventional system (only-38.6 +/- 18.4% and 24.4 +/- 6.0%). The nitrogen removal process, pore water variation, and functional gene analysis further demonstrate that the biochar and woodchip amendment extended the reactive volume in the bioreactor, facilitating nitrogen removal in both the upper layer and internal water storage zone (IWSZ). Biochar amendment in the upper layer increased volumetric water content, ammonium adsorption, nitrification, and denitrification. Although a slight amount of ammonium generation was found, woodchip addition greatly enhanced the denitrification rate in the IWSZ. In contrast, the upper layer of the conventional system cannot completely adsorb and transform ammonium. The denitrification performance in both the upper layer and IWSZ of the conventional system was poor as well. And the lack of nosZ in the IWSZ also made it potentially become a nitrous oxide emission source. Overall, the biochar woodchip modified system greatly extended the reactive volume and enhanced nitrogen removal, making it become a promising alternative to conventional sand bio-retention system for stormwater runoff nitrogen treatment.},
   abstract = {Denitrifying woodchip bioreactors (DBRs) are an established nitrate mitigation technology, but uncertainty remains on their viability for phosphorus (P) removal due to inconsistent source-sink behaviour in field trials. We investigated whether iron (Fe) redox cycling could be the missing link needed to explain P dynamics in these systems. A pilot-scale DBR (Aotearoa New Zealand) was monitored for the first two drainage seasons (2017-2018), with supplemental in-field measurements of reduced solutes (Fe(2+), HS(-)/H(2)S) and their conjugate oxidised species (Fe(3+)/SO(4)(2-)) made in 2021 to constrain within-reactor redox gradients. Consistent with thermodynamics, the dissolution of Fe(3+)((s)) to Fe(2+)(()(aq)()) within the DBR sequentially followed O(2), NO(3)(-) and MnO(2)((s)) reduction, but occurred before SO(4)(2-) reduction. Monitoring of inlet and outlet chemistry revealed tight coupling between Fe and P (inlet R(2) 0.94, outlet R(2) 0.85), but distinct dynamics between drainage seasons. In season one, outlet P exceeded inlet P (net P source), and coincided with elevated outlet Fe(2+), but at ⁓50 % lower P concentrations relative to inlet Fe:P ratios. In season 2 the reactor became a net P sink, coinciding with declining outlet Fe(2+) concentrations (indicating exhaustion of Fe(3+)((s)) hydroxides and associated P). In order to characterize P removal under varying source dynamics (i.e. inflows vs in-situ P releases), we used the inlet Fe vs P relationship to estimate P binding to colloidal Fe (hydr)oxide surfaces under oxic conditions, and the outlet Fe(2+) concentration to estimate in-situ P releases associated with Fe (hydr)oxide reduction. Inferred P-removal rates were highest early in season 1 (k = 0.60 g P m(3) d(-1); 75-100 % removal), declining significantly thereafter (k = 0.01 +/- 0.02 g P m(3) d(-1); ca. 3-67 % removal). These calculations suggest that microbiological P removal in DBRs can occur at comparable magnitudes to nitrate removal by denitrification, depending mainly on P availability and hydraulic retention efficiency.},
   abstract = {Nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) losses to surface and coastal waters are still critically high across Europe and globally. Measures to mitigate and reduce these losses are being implemented both at the cultivated land surface and at the edge-of-fields. Woodchip bioreactors represent a new alternative in Denmark for treating agricultural drainage water, and the present study-based on two years of data from five Danish field-based bioreactors-determined N removal rates varying from 1.49 to 5.37 g N m(-3) d(-1) and a mean across all bioreactors and years of 2.90 g N m(-3) d(-1). The loss of phosphorus was relatively high the first year after bioreactor establishment with rates varying from 298.4 to 890.8 mg P m(-3) d(-1), but in the second year, the rates ranged from 12.2 to 77.2 mg P m(-3) d(-1). The investments and the costs of the bioreactors were larger than expected based on Danish standard investments. The cost efficiency analysis found the key issues to be the need for larger investments in the bioreactor itself combined with higher advisory costs. For the four woodchip bioreactors considered in the cost efficiency analysis, the N removal cost was around DKK 350 per kg N ($50 per kg N), which is ca. 50% higher than the standard costs defined by the Danish authorities. Based on the estimated costs of the four bioreactor facilities included in this analysis, a bioreactor is one of the most expensive nitrogen reduction measures compared to other mitigation tools.},
   abstract = {The performance of three (1.0 m(3) volume each) pilot-scale bioreactors, with one filled with woodchips only and the other two amended (10% v/v) with activated C and flaxseed cake, respectively, was tested under field conditions for nitrate removal from tile drainage water in Lithuania. The bioreactors were monitored for a period of 1.5 y, during which the flow rate, hydraulic retention time, water T, pH, dissolved 0, nitrate, nitrite, ammonium, sulfate, and chemical 0 demand concentrations were measured. The results showed that the average nitrate removal efficiency in the bioreactor with no additives was 40.3%, and it was 44.1% in the bioreactor with activated C additives. In the bioreactor with flaxseed cake additives, 41.2% of the N was removed. During the cold seasonal period when the inflow T varied between +1.8 degrees C and + 10.0 degrees C, activated C-amended woodchips showed higher efficiency and supported higher nitrate removal rates compared to those of other fillers. The highest nitrate removal efficiency was achieved at a pH of 7.0-7.5.
   abstract = {Nutrient losses from agricultural fields have long been a matter of concern worldwide due to the ecological disturbance this can cause to surface waters downstream. In this paper a new design concept, which pairs a surface-flow constructed wetland (SFW) with a woodchip bioreactor (WB), was tested in relation to its capacity to reduce both nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) loads from agricultural tile drainage water. A nutrient mass balance and a comparative analysis were carried out together with statistical regressions in order to evaluate the performance of four SFW+WBs under different catchment conditions. We found marked variations between the systems in regard to hydraulic loading rate (0.0 to 5.0 m/day) and hydraulic retention time (1 to 87 days). The paired system worked as nutrient sinks throughout the study period. Total N and total P removal efficiencies varied from 8% to 51% and from 0% to 80%, respectively. The results support the use of the new design concept for nutrient removal from tile-drained agricultural catchments in Denmark as part of national management plans, with the added advantage that smaller areas are needed for construction (0.1% to 0.2% of the catchment area) in comparison to standalone and currently used SCWs (similar to 1%).},
   abstract = {Denitrifying bioreactors using woodchips or other slow-release carbon sources can be an effective method for removing nitrate (NO) from wastewater and tile drainage. However, the ability of these systems to remove fecal microbes from wastewater has been largely uninvestigated. In this study, reductions in fecal indicator bacteria () and viruses (F-specific RNA bacteriophage [FRNA phage]) were analyzed by monthly sampling along a longitudinal transect within a full-scale denitrifying woodchip bioreactor receiving secondary-treated septic tank effluent. Nitrogen, phosphorus, 5-d carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD), and total suspended solids (TSS) reduction were also assessed. The bioreactor demonstrated consistent and substantial reduction of (2.9 log reduction) and FRNA phage (3.9 log reduction) despite receiving highly fluctuating inflow concentrations [up to 3.5 x 10 MPN (100 mL) and 1.1 x 10 plaque-forming units (100 mL) , respectively]. Most of the removal of fecal microbial contaminants occurred within the first meter of the system (1.4 log reduction for ; 1.8 log reduction for FRNA phage). The system was also efficient at removing NO (>99.9% reduction) and TSS (89% reduction). There was no evidence of consistent removal of ammonium, organic nitrogen, or phosphorus. Leaching of CBOD occurred during initial operation but decreased and stabilized at lower values (14 g O m) after 9 mo. We present strong evidence for reliable microbial contaminant removal in denitrifying bioreactors, demonstrating their broader versatility for wastewater treatment. Research on the removal mechanisms of microbial contaminants in these systems, together with the assessment of longevity of removal, is warranted.},
   abstract = {While enabling economically viable use of poorly drained soils, artificial subsurface drainage has also been found to be a significant pathway for nutrient transfers from agricultural land to surface waters. Thus, mitigating the impacts of agriculture on surface water quality needs to address nutrient transfers via subsurface drainage. Woodchip bioreactors are a promising mitigation option as demonstrated under arable agriculture in the midwest of the USA. However, research is needed to ascertain their efficiency in removing nutrients from very flashy drainage flows common in New Zealand (NZ) pastoral agriculture and any possible pollution swapping (e.g. reduction of leaching losses vs. greenhouse gas emissions). Accordingly, a lined 78-m3 woodchip bioreactor was constructed on a dairy farm in the Hauraki Plains (Waikato, NZ) with a drainage area of 0.65 ha. Rainfall, flow, hydrochemistry and dissolved gases in the inflow and outflow were monitored for two drainage seasons (part of 2017, 2018). Based on the nitrate-N fluxes, the estimated nitrate removal efficiency of the bioreactor was 99 and 48% in 2017 and 2018, respectively. The higher removal efficiency in 2017 could be attributed to two reasons. Firstly, the substantially longer hydraulic residence time (HRT) of the water in the bioreactor (mean= 21.1 days vs 4.7 days in 2018) provided more opportunity for microorganisms to reduce the nitrate. A strong positive relationship between HRT and removal efficiency was also observed within the 2018 drainage season. Secondly, denitrification was supported in 2017 by greater electron donor availability. Evidence of this was the higher mass of DOC discharge from the bioreactor (318 mg C L-1 of bioreactor volume vs 165 mg C L-1 in 2018). Removal rates in the bioreactor varied from 0.67-1.60 g N m-3 day-1 and were positively correlated with inflow nitrate loads. Pollution swapping was observed during the start-up phase of the bioreactor in both years (DOC, and DRP only in 2017) and during periods with very long HRTs (hydrogen sulphide (H2S) and methane (CH4) production). Substantially elevated discharges of DOC and DRP, as compared to inlet conditions, occurred during the initial start-up phase of the bioreactor in 2017 (3 to 3.5 pore volumes of the bioreactor), but only slightly elevated DOC and decreased DRP discharges were observed when drainage flow resumed at the start of the 2018 drainage season. Unexpectedly, cumulative DRP removal during the 2018 drainage season amounted to 89% of the DRP inflow into the bioreactor. Long HRTs (> 5 days) enabled high nitrate removal efficiency (=59%) and promoted complete reduction of nitrate to harmless dinitrogen gas but also promoted strongly reduced conditions, resulting in the production of H2S and CH4. On the other hand, short HRTs (< 4 days) only allowed for moderate nitrate removal efficiency (=43%) and constrained complete reduction of nitrate resulting in higher nitrous oxide concentrations in the outflow as compared to the inflow. Thus, nitrate removals above 50% were not able to be achieved without inducing H2S and CH4 generation. However, it may be achievable when the microbial community is provided with an additional source of readily available carbon during the critical periods when hydraulic flow and concomitant N load peaks occur.},
   abstract = {Nitrogen losses from croplands contribute to impairment of water bodies. This laboratory experiment evaluated various C sources for use in a denitrifying bioreactor, a conservation practice designed to reduce N losses. The nitrate removal efficiency of candidate treatments (corn cobs [CC], corn cobs with modified coconut coir [CC+MC], corn cobs with modified coconut coir and modified macadamia shell biochar [CC+MC+MBC], wood chips [WC], wood chips with hardwood biochar [WC+BC], and wood chips with continuous sodium acetate addition [WC+A]) were tested with up-flow direction. Effluent was sampled after a repeated weekly flow regime with hydraulic residence times of 1.5, 8, 12, and 24 h. Column temperatures were 15 degrees C for 14 wk (warm), 5 degrees C for 13 wk (cold), and again 15 degrees C for 7 wk (rewarm). Cumulative nitrate N load reduction was greatest for WC+A (80, 80, and 97% during the warm, cold, and rewarm runs, respectively). Corn cob treatments (CC, CC+MC, and CC+MC+MBC) had the second greatest cumulative load reductions for all three temperature experiments, and WC and WC+BC had the lowest performance under these conditions. The nitrate removal rate was optimum at the 1.5-h hydraulic residence time for the WC+A treatment: 43, 30, and 121 g N m d for the warm, cold, and rewarm runs, respectively. Furthermore, acetate addition greatly improved wood chip performance and could be used to enhance nitrate N removal under the cold and high-flow-rate conditions of springtime drainage for the north-central United States.},
   abstract = {Featured Application Denitrifying woodchip bioreactors are an effective treatment technology for agricultural tile drainage. This work further expands the application to treat leachate and storm-driven runoff from silage storage bunkers. Additional applications of this treatment technology may effectively treat other agricultural wastewaters containing high nutrient concentrations. Leachate and storm-driven runoff from silage storage bunkers can degrade receiving water bodies if left untreated. This study evaluated a novel treatment system consisting of three treatment tanks with a moving-bed biofilm reactor and paired side-by-side denitrifying woodchip bioreactors for the ability to reduce influent nutrient mass loads. Flow-based samples were taken at four locations throughout the system, at the inflow to the first tank, outflow from the tanks prior to entering the woodchip bioreactors, and from the outflows of both bioreactors. Samples were analyzed for concentrations of nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) species. Inflow concentrations were reduced from the bioreactor outflows by an average of 35% for total N (TN) and 16% for total P (TP) concentrations on a storm event basis. The treatment system cumulatively removed 76% of the TN mass load, 71% of the nitrite + nitrate-N (NO2-+NO3--N) load, 26% of the TP mass load, and 19% of the soluble reactive P load, but was a source of ammonium-N, based on the monitoring of 16 storm events throughout 2019. While the system was effective, very low NO2-+NO3--N concentrations in the silage bunker runoff entered the bioreactors, which may have inhibited denitrification performance.},
   abstract = {Denitrification walls are a useful approach for removing nitrate from shallow groundwater, but little is known about the sustainability of nitrate removal, which is dependent on the continued supply of organic carbon to denitrifying bacteria. To address this question, we monitored nitrate removal, denitrification and carbon dynamics in a pilot-scale denitrification wall for 5 yr. The wall continuously removed more than 95% of the incoming nitrate in groundwater, which ranged from 5 to 15 mg N L(-1). We did not detect decreases in total carbon during the 5-yr study. Available carbon declined for the first 200 days after the wall was constructed but has since remained relatively constant. While microbial biomass has varied between 350 and 550 microg C g(-1) there was no downward trend, suggesting that carbon availability was not limiting the size of the microbial population. However, there was a large decrease in denitrifying population, as indicated by declines in denitrifying enzyme activity. Despite this decrease, denitrification rates have remained high enough to remove nitrate from groundwater and denitrification was limited by nitrate rather than by carbon. Our data demonstrates that there was sufficient available carbon in this denitrification wall to support denitrification and nitrate removal for at least 5 yr.},
   abstract = {Woodchip-based denitrification bioreactors are widely used for treatment of high loads of nitrate pollution in agricultural run-off water. A concern raised recently, as a consequence of various organic fillings being experimented with, is whether the positive effect given by nitrate reduction could override the negative effects of such bioreactors, mainly caused by degradation of wood and the production of potentially harmful conditions for aquatic ecosystems. This paper presents the results of the experimental testing of two different filling materials: birch (BWCH) and spruce (SWCH) woodchip, and their mixture with washed gravel (WG) in volumetric ratio 10:1. We have focused on the leaching of organic carbon and phenols, and its impact on selected aquatic organisms, as well as on their denitrification efficiency and NO(3)(-) load removal rate (LRT). The results show that TOC, DOC and FNI (phenolic index) leaching is higher for the pure woodchip materials and is closely correlated with the growth inhibition of tested organisms (Vibrio fischeri, Daphnia magna, Desmodesmus subspicatus, Lemna minor). The highest denitrification efficiency and the highest load removal rates were recorded in mixed filling material (96% and 1.4 mg NO(3)(-).dm(3).d(-1) for WG:BWCH; 85% and 1.2 mg NO(3)(-).dm(3).d(-1) for WG:SWCH). Denitrification bioreactors with mixed woodchip filling material present a promising, cheap, and extensive technology for the treatment of agricultural field run-offs.},
   abstract = {Denitrification 'woodchip' bioreactors designed to remove nitrate from agricultural waters may either be phosphorus sources or sinks. A 24 d batch test showed woodchip leaching is an important source of phosphorus during bioreactor start-up with a leaching potential of approximately 20-30 mg P per kg wood. The most rapid phosphorus release occurred within the first 24 h regardless of deionized water or aquaculture wastewater matrices; the Elovitch equation generally best modeled this multi-phasic P leaching. Four pilot-scale bioreactors consistently removed total phosphorus from aquaculture wastewater (15-54% removal efficiency). All bioreactors initially exported dissolved reactive phosphorus, although the lower flow rate treatments eventually resulted in dissolved reactive phosphorus removal. Filtered wastewater solids may have contributed more to longer-term P leaching than the woodchips. (C) 2016 Published by Elsevier B.V.},
   abstract = {Stacking edge-of-field practices may improve nutrient removal from crops. To examine the effects of stacking edge-of-field conservation practices, a woodchip bioreactor (WBR) and saturated riparian buffer (SRB) were installed in series by intercepting tile flow from a field having a drainage water management system. Nutrient monitoring from 5 years evaluated nutrient export annually and based on the precipitation intensity. Drainage water was monitored for total suspended solids (TSS), nitrate-N, total-P, total-N, and ortho-P at the inlet and outlet of WBR and control structure of SRB. Nutrient export reductions of WBR and SRB were determined for precipitation events that were categorized as low <12.7 mm, mid 12.7-25.4 mm, high 25.4-50.8 mm, and very high >50.8 mm. Over the five seasons, nitrate-N export was reduced 88 % at the WBR outlet and 78 % at SRB outlet when used in a stacked series configuration. The efficacy of edge-of-field practices was affected by the intensity of precipitation events. The low and mid-intensity precipitation events generated 67 % of the total discharge from the subsurface drainage system which accounted for 74 % of the influent nitrate-N. During low and mid-intensity precipitation events, discharge was reduced by 58-65 %, nitrate-N was reduced by 49-88 % and total-P was reduced by 65-73 % by using stacked practice of WBR and SRB. During high and very high-intensity precipitation events only nitrate-N export was reduced by 61-66 %. This indicates that when designing stacked edge-of-the-field practices the cumulative effect of the practices and their performance during different precipitation events should be taken into account when managing conservation practice-based cropping systems.},
   abstract = {Woodchip denitrification bioreactors are an important edge-of-field practice for treating agricultural drainage; however, their ability to filter microbial pollutants has primarily been explored in the context of wastewater treatment. Upflow column reactors were constructed and tested for E. coli, Salmonella, NO3-N, and dissolved reactive phosphorus (DRP) at hydraulic retention times (HRTs) of 12 and 24 h and at controlled temperatures of 10 and 21.5 degrees C. Influent solution was spiked to 30 mg L-1 NO3-N, 2-8x10(5) E. coli and Salmonella, and 0.1 mg L-1 DRP. Microbial removal was consistently observed with removal ranging from 75 to 78% reduction at 10 degrees C and 90-96% at 21.5 degrees C. The concentration reduction ranged from 2.75 to 9.03x10(4) for both organisms. HRT had less impact on microbial removal than temperature and thus further investigation of removal under lower HRTs is warranted. Nitrate concentrations averaged 96% reduction (with load removal of 14.6 g Nm(-3) d(-1)) from 21.5 degrees C columns at 24 HRT and 29% reduction (with load removal of 8.8 g Nm(-3) d(-1)) from 10 degrees C columns at 12 HRT. DRP removal was likely temporary due to microbial uptake. While potential for removal of E. coli and Salmonella by woodchip bioreactors is demonstrated, system design will need to be considered. High concentrations of these microbial contaminants are likely to occur during peak flows, when bypass flow may be occurring. The results of this study show that woodchip bioreactors operated for nitrate removal have a secondary benefit through the removal of enteric bacteria.},
   abstract = {Urban stormwater has recently been considered a potential water resource to augment urban water supplies; however, the existence of emerging contaminants limits urban stormwater utilization. This study aims to use woodchip bioreactors, which are natural and inexpensive, to remove emerging contaminants from artificial stormwater, with a focus on the contaminant removal processes in the woodchip bioreactor and on the effects of operational parameters on the system performance. Seven commonly detected emerging contaminants - acetaminophen (ACE), caffeine (CAFF), carbamazepine (CBZ), ibuprofen (IBU), sulfathiazole (SFZ), benzotriazole (BT) and 5-methyl-1H-benzotriazole (5-MeBT) - were studied. The results showed that the removal efficiency and removal processes are heavily dependent on the compound. ACE and CAFF have the highest removal efficiencies (>/=80%), and sorption and biodegradation are both crucial for their removal. However, IBU exhibits very limited sorption and biodegradation and hence has the worst removal (</=15%). The removal efficiencies of the other compounds (SFZ, CBZ, BT and 5-MeBT) range from approximately 30 to 60%, and sorption is likely the main removal process. The effects of several operational parameters, including woodchip type, operation time, season and flow rate, on the removal rate of emerging contaminants were also explored. The results of this study showed that the woodchip column system, which is capable of sorption and biodegradation, represents a promising treatment process for removing emerging contaminants from urban stormwater.},
   abstract = {Agricultural hothouses are intensive food production systems relying on high fertilization and irrigation. Runoff from hothouses can contain high levels of nitrogen (N) and drain into streams. Here, we investigate the effectiveness of buried, inline woodchip bioreactors constructed using PVC pipes in removing nitrate (NO3--N) and the possibility of pollution swapping from nitrate to the greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N2O). Mean dissolved NO3--N removal and N2O gas production were 6.0 +/- 5.2 g N m(-3) h(-1) (0.9-12.3 g N m(-3) h(-1)), and 35.1 +/- 31.4 mg N L-1 h(-1) (14-83 mg N L-1 h(-1)) respectively, across five surveys. NO3--N removal and N2O-N production occurred primarily in hypoxic to anoxic conditions. Overall, these inline pipe bioreactors achieved nitrate removal efficiencies (NRE) of 14.5 +/- 6.8% (8.2%-25.0%) and N2O production equivalent to 0.7 +/- 0.6% (0.3-1.4%) of nitrate removal. Comparisons to the literature indicate that our bioreactors have a low NRE but a very high nitrate removal rate (NRR) on a woodchip volume basis. The bioreactor was operating at 21% water capacity. Therefore, increasing the bioreactor water height would be needed to maximize nitrate removal. Our results imply that these bioreactors can efficiently remove NO3-N without major N2O release to the atmosphere.},
   abstract = {A novel heterotrophic nitrification and aerobic denitrification (HN-AD) bacterium D1-1 was identified as Pseudomonas nicosulfuronedens D1-1. Strain D1-1 removed 97.24%, 97.25%, and 77.12% of 100 mg/L NH(4)(+)-N, NO(3)(-)-N, and NO(2)(-)-N, with corresponding maximum removal rates of 7.42, 8.69, and 7.15 mg.L(-1).h(-1), respectively. Strain D1-1 bioaugmentation enhanced woodchip bioreactor performance with an average NO(3)(-)-N removal efficiency of 93.8%. Bioaugmentation enriched N cyclers along with increased bacterial diversity and predicted genes for denitrification, DNRA (dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium), and ammonium oxidation. It also reduced local selection and network modularity from 4.336 to 0.934, resulting in predicted nitrogen (N) cycling genes shared by more modules. These observations suggested that bioaugmentation could enhance the functional redundancy to stabilize the NO(3)(-)-N removal performance. This study provides insights into the potential applications of HN-AD bacteria in bioremediation or other environmental engineering fields, relying on their ability to shape bacterial communities.},
   abstract = {Denitrification beds are a simple approach for removing nitrate (NO(3)(-)) from a range of point sources prior to discharge into receiving waters. These beds are large containers filled with woodchips that act as an energy source for microorganisms to convert NO(3)(-) to nitrogen (N) gases (N(2)O, N(2)) through denitrification. This study investigated the biological mechanism of NO(3)(-) removal, its controlling factors and its adverse effects in a large denitrification bed (176 m x 5m x 1.5 m) receiving effluent with a high NO(3)(-) concentration (> 100 g N m(-3)) from a hydroponic glasshouse (Karaka, Auckland, New Zealand). Samples of woodchips and water were collected from 12 sites along the bed every two months for one year, along with measurements of gas fluxes from the bed surface. Denitrifying enzyme activity (DEA), factors limiting denitrification (availability of carbon, dissolved organic carbon (DOC), dissolved oxygen (DO), temperature, pH, and concentrations of NO(3)(-), nitrite (NO(2)(-)) and sulfide (S(2-))), greenhouse gas (GHG) production - as nitrous oxide (N(2)O), methane (CH(4)), carbon dioxide (CO(2)) - and carbon (C) loss were determined. NO(3)(-)-N concentration declined along the bed with total NO(3)(-)-N removal rates of 10.1 kg N d(-1) for the whole bed or 7.6 g N m(-3) d(-1). NO(3)(-)-N removal rates increased with temperature (Q(10) = 2.0). In laboratory incubations, denitrification was always limited by C availability rather than by NO(3)(-). DO levels were above 0.5 mg L(-1) at the inlet but did not limit NO(3)(-)-N removal. pH increased steadily from about 6 to 7 along the length of the bed. Dissolved inorganic carbon (C-CO(2)) increased in average about 27.8 mg L(-1), whereas DOC decreased slightly by about 0.2 mg L(-1) along the length of the bed. The bed surface emitted on average 78.58 mu g m(-2) min(-1) N(2)O-N (reflecting 1% of the removed NO(3)(-)-N), 0.238 mu g m(-2) min(-1) CH(4) and 12.6 mg m(-2) min(-1) CO(2). Dissolved N(2)O-N increased along the length of the bed and the bed released on average 362 g dissolved N(2)O-N per day coupled with N(2)O emission at the surface about 4.3% of the removed NO(3)(-)-N as N(2)O. Mechanisms to reduce the production of this GHG need to be investigated if denitrification beds are commonly used. Dissolved CH(4) concentrations showed no trends along the length of the bed, ranging from 5.28 mu g L(-1) to 34.24 mu g L(-1). Sulfate (SO(4)(2-)) concentrations declined along the length of the bed on three of six samplings; however, declines in SO(4)(2-) did not appear to be due to SO(4)(2-) reduction because S(2-) concentrations were generally undetectable. Ammonium (NH(4)(+)) (range: < 0.0007 mg L(-1) to 2.12 mg L(-1)) and NO(2)(-) concentrations (range: 0.0018 mg L(-1) to 0.95 mg L(-1)) were always very low suggesting that anammox was an unlikely mechanism for NO(3)(-) removal in the bed.
   abstract = {Denitrification beds are containers filled with wood by-products that serve as a carbon and energy source to denitrifiers, which reduce nitrate (NO(3)(-)) from point source discharges into non-reactive dinitrogen (N(2)) gas. This study investigates a range of alternative carbon sources and determines rates, mechanisms and factors controlling NO(3)(-) removal, denitrifying bacterial community, and the adverse effects of these substrates. Experimental barrels (0.2 m(3)) filled with either maize cobs, wheat straw, green waste, sawdust, pine woodchips or eucalyptus woodchips were incubated at 16.8 degrees C or 27.1 degrees C (outlet temperature), and received NO(3)(-) enriched water (14.38 mg N L(-1) and 17.15 mg N L(-1)). After 2.5 years of incubation measurements were made of NO(3)(-)-N removal rates, in vitro denitrification rates (DR), factors limiting denitrification (carbon and nitrate availability, dissolved oxygen, temperature, pH, and concentrations of NO(3)(-), nitrite and ammonia), copy number of nitrite reductase (nirS and nirK) and nitrous oxide reductase (nosZ) genes, and greenhouse gas production (dissolved nitrous oxide (N(2)O) and methane), and carbon (TOC) loss. Microbial denitrification was the main mechanism for NO(3)(-)-N removal. Nitrate-N removal rates ranged from 1.3 (pine woodchips) to 6.2 g N m(-3) d(-1) (maize cobs), and were predominantly limited by C availability and temperature (Q(10) = 1.2) when NO(3)(-)-N outlet concentrations remained above 1 mg L(-1). The NO(3)(-)-N removal rate did not depend directly on substrate type, but on the quantity of microbially available carbon, which differed between carbon sources. The abundance of denitrifying genes (nirS, nirK and nosZ) was similar in replicate barrels under cold incubation, but varied substantially under warm incubation, and between substrates. Warm incubation enhanced growth of nirS containing bacteria and bacteria that lacked the nosZ gene, potentially explaining the greater N(2)O emission in warmer environments. Maize cob substrate had the highest NO(3)(-)-N removal rate, but adverse effects include TOC release, dissolved N(2)O release and substantial carbon consumption by non-denitrifiers. Woodchips removed less than half of NO(3)(-) removed by maize cobs, but provided ideal conditions for denitrifying bacteria, and adverse effects were not observed. Therefore we recommend the combination of maize cobs and woodchips to enhance NO(3)(-) removal while minimizing adverse effects in denitrification beds.},
   abstract = {Nitrogen loss via overland flow from agricultural land use is a global threat to waterways. On-farm denitrifying woodchip bioreactors can mitigate NO(3)(-) exports by increasing denitrification capacity. However, denitrification in sub-optimal conditions releases the greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N(2)O), swapping the pollution from aquatic to atmospheric reservoirs. Here, we assess NO(3)(-)-N removal and N(2)O emissions from a new edge-of-field surface-flow bioreactor during ten rain events on intensive farming land. Nitrate removal rates (NRR) varied between 5.4 and 76.2 g NO(3)(-)-N m(-3) wetted woodchip d(-1) with a mean of 30.3 +/- 7.3 g NO(3)(-)-N m(-3). The nitrate removal efficiency (NRE) was approximately 73% in ideal hydrological conditions and approximately 18% in non-ideal conditions. The fraction of NO(3)(-)-N converted to N(2)O (rN(2)O) in the bioreactor was approximately 3.3 fold lower than the expected 0.75% IPCC emission factor. We update the global bioreactor estimated Q(10) (NRR increase every 10 degrees C) from a recent meta-analysis with previously unavailable data to >20 degrees C, yielding a new global Q(10) factor of 3.1. Mean N(2)O CO(2)-eq emissions (431.9 +/- 125.4 g CO(2)-eq emissions day(-1)) indicate that the bioreactor was not significantly swapping aquatic NO(3)(-) for N(2)O pollution. Our estimated NO(3)(-)-N removal from the bioreactor (9.9 kg NO(3)(-)-N ha(-1) yr(-1)) costs US$13.14 per kg NO(3)(-)-N removed and represents approximately 30% NO(3)(-)-N removal when incorporating all flow and overflow events. Overall, edge-of-field surface-flow bioreactors seem to be a cost-effective solution to reduce NO(3)(-)-N runoff with minor pollution swapping to N(2)O.},
   abstract = {We constructed a bench-scale continuous-flow (8 L total volume, 4.3 L/day) woodchip bioreactor and operated the reactor under field-like conditions to evaluate joint pesticide and nitrate removal. The continuous-flow reactor achieved 83.5 +/- 8% diuron removal and 61.6 +/- 11.9% imidacloprid removal with a 24 h hydraulic retention time (HRT). We designed a sequencing-batch reactor configuration (8 L total volume) to evaluate the impact of an aerobic phase on denitrification and pesticide removal performance. The sequencing-batch reactor achieved 89.2 +/- 8.8% nitrate removal with a hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 12 h, while the continuous-flow design achieved 55.6 +/- 9.1% nitrate removal with a 12 h HRT. There was no significant difference between pesticide removal between sequencing-batch and continuous -flow reactor types (p = 0.655 and p = 0.316 for diuron and imidacloprid removal, respectively). Kinetic batch tests revealed sorption, not microbial degradation, as the main mechanism of removal for both diuron and imidacloprid under denitrifying conditions. Imidacloprid removal ranged from 440.4 to 532.0 ng/gwoodchip (dry mass) and diuron removal between 468.6 and 553.8 ng/g-woodchip (dry mass) over 24 h. The bench-scale evaluation of pesticide behavior in woodchip bioreactors highlights the need to improve microbial degradation in such best management practices for pesticide removal.},
   abstract = {The risk of nitrate contamination became a reality for Fairmont in Minnesota, when water rich in NO3-N exceeded the drinking water standard of 10 mg/L. This was unexpected because this city draws its municipal water from a chain of lakes that are fed primarily by shallow groundwater under row-crop land use. Spring soil thaw drives cold water into a subsurface pipe where almost no NO3-N reduction occurs. This paper focuses on NO3-N reduction before the water enters the lakes and no other nitrogen management practices in the watershed. A novel denitrifying bioreactor was constructed behind a sediment forebay, which then flowed into a chamber covered by a greenhouse before entering a woodchip bioreactor. In 2022 and 2023, water depth, dissolved oxygen, and temperature were measured at several locations in the bioreactor, and continuous NO3-N was measured at the entry and exit of the bioreactor. The results showed better performance at a low water depth with lower dissolved oxygen and higher water temperature. The greenhouse raised the inlet temperature in 2022 but did not in 2023. The forebay and the greenhouse may have impeded the denitrification process due to the high dissolved oxygen concentrations in the influent and the stratification of dissolved oxygen caused by algae in the bioreactor.},
   abstract = {A heterotrophic nitrifying and aerobic denitrifying fungus was isolated from lake water and identified as Penicillium tropicum strain IS0293. The strain exhibited efficient heterotrophic nitrification-aerobic denitrification ability and could utilize ammonium, nitrite and nitrate as a sole nitrogen source. Batch tests demonstrated that strain IS0293 can remove nitrate using variety of organic carbon compounds as carbon sources. The effect of woodchip leachate collected at different degradation times on denitrification performance of the strain was also investigated. Furthermore, two denitrifying woodchip bioreactors were constructed to assess the bioaugmention of strain IS0293 for nitrate removal from surface water. Results demonstrated that the incubation of strain IS0293 enhanced the nitrate removal efficiency of the bioreactor. In addition, the average effluent TOC content of the bioaugmention bioreactor was 38.22% lower than the control bioreactor. This study would be valuable to develop an effective technology for nitrate-laden surface water under aerobic conditions.},
   abstract = {Nature-based treatment technologies such as denitrifying woodchip bioreactors (WBRs) are employed to manage nitrogen (N) pollution from agricultural nonpoint sources. Due to variability in environmental conditions like temperature and discharge, it is challenging to achieve consistent treatment effectiveness with these passive systems. To improve nitrate (NO3-) load reductions in a field-scale WBR in New York State during cool spring weather, we designed a system for controlled exogenous carbon (C) dosing, allowing rates of C dosing to respond in real time to changing discharge and NO3- concentrations. Treatment efficiencies for NO3-, acetate mass balances, and other bioreactor properties were monitored from April 5 to June 10, 2023. Biostimulation with 7.5 mg C/L acetate (assuming complete mixing of injected acetate with bioreactor pore water) increased NO3- removal rates up to 5-fold compared to a model-based scenario of baseline bioreactor performance, and were as high as 0.4 mg NO3--N L-1 h(-1) while water temperatures were <12 degrees C. Increasing acetate concentrations beyond 7.5 mg C/L did not confer a clear improvement in NO3- removal rates. Cumulative N load reductions increased from 11.3% under the baseline scenario without C dosing to 24.1% with C dosing. The mass ratio of metabolized C to additional N removal was 2.5:1, although the total dosed C/N mass ratio was 5.1:1 due to incomplete acetate utilization in the reactor. We found evidence that C dosing could enhance the future release of dissolved organic N (DON) and dissolved organic C related to biofilm sloughing. The expense of acetate, with a cost efficiency of 86 USD/kg N, was the main cost driver of the real-time control approach. Our results demonstrate the potential of real-time control of C dosing to meaningfully improve nonpoint source N removal during cool spring conditions but also highlight opportunities for methods to improve acetate utilization efficiencies in order to improve the overall cost-effectiveness of the approach.},
   abstract = {The co-occurrence of nutrients and pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) in sewage effluent can degrade water quality of the receiving watersheds. This study investigated the simultaneous removal of excess nutrients and PPCP contaminants by developing a novel woodchip bioreactor and biochar (B(2)) treatment system. The result revealed that woodchip bioreactors could effectively remove nitrate via a denitrification process and adsorb some PPCPs. Biochar as a secondary treatment system significantly reduced the concentrations of PPCPs and dissolved reactive phosphorus (DRP) (p < 0.05), compared to the woodchip bioreactor. The removal efficiencies of all targeted contaminants by the B(2) system were evaluated using various hydraulic retention times (HRTs) and biochar types (pelletized versus granular biochar). Longer HRTs and smaller biochar particles (granular biochar) could enhance the removal efficiencies of targeted contaminants. Average contaminant removals were 77.25 % for nitrate-N, 99.03 % for DRP, 69.51 % for ibuprofen, 73.65 % for naproxen, 91.09 % for sitagliptin, and 96.96 % for estrone, with woodchip bioreactor HRTs of 12 +/- 1.4 h and granular biochar HRTs of 2.1 +/- 0.1 h. Notably, the second-stage biochar systems effectively mitigated by-products leaching from woodchip bioreactors. The presence of PPCPs in the woodchip bioreactors enriched certain species, such as Methylophilus (69.6 %), while inhibiting other microorganisms and reducing microbial community diversity. Furthermore, a scaled-up B(2) system was analyzed and assessed, indicating that the proposed engineering treatment system could provide decades of service in real-world applications. Overall, this study suggests that the B(2) system has promising applications for addressing emerging and conventional contaminants.},
